SPEAKER_01: 0:00:00-0:00:07
It doesn't really concern my father very much.

Well, except he was somehow involved because there was this meeting in Jerusalem and he was there.

SPEAKER_00: 0:00:07-0:00:07
Okay.

Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:00:08-0:00:48
Yeah, there were financial troubles.

You had some financial trouble about getting there or passport problems.

Anyway, you tell the story.

Okay.

Here's the story you love.

Okay, Arjay and I decided to get married.

Right.

And we were where?

In Poland.

Okay.

And it turned out that at that particular moment, they told us that we needed permission from the American embassy to get married in Poland and the American embassy so I trotted to the American Embassy.

The American embassy said that they had no jurisdiction to give permissions to marry.

That's just not something that the embassy does.

Now, who the polls told But who's American?

You're American.

SPEAKER_00: 0:00:48-0:00:49
Yes, I'm an American citizen.

SPEAKER_01: 0:00:49-0:00:50
But Anjay is not.

default: 0:00:51-0:00:52
Okay.

Okay.

SPEAKER_01: 0:00:52-0:00:53
I'm going to take notes too.

SPEAKER_00: 0:00:54-0:01:04
So I trotted back to the Polish whoever it was the people who told me that I had to have permission from the American embassy.

SPEAKER_01: 0:01:04-0:02:09
And I said, They don't give permissions.

And I thought that would be the end of that and they said, Well, you have to have a permission.

So I went back to the American embassy and said, They said, I have to have a permission.

I mean, I know that people get married here who are, you know, one is an American citizen, one is a Polish citizen.

You know, how do they do it?

Well, we couldn't get past this.

It turned out that they were just in the middle of changing the laws and they were putting everything on hold, and they were putting it on hold in this particular way, which is that of saying something which was impossible to accomplish when this OK, so this again, you know, you know that I don't know what you don't know.

You don't know what year you got there?

No, we know I can figure it out and I can look it up.

I can guess.

Well, let's see, I think I was in Poland sixty sixty one, then we were here ' sixty two, was it sixty two or ' sixty two, ' sixty three?

And then we were so I think it was sixty four.

How old were you when you got married?

Maybe you can work it out?

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:10-0:02:17
I don't even know that.

I mean, you know, we were living together before, so it didn't make much difference, you know, it wasn't as if it was a big change.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:18-0:02:46
But made suddenly decide to get married by the way.

We just decided it was time to get married.

Okay.

All right.

You weren't pregnant?

No, no, that's what makes people these days.

Okay, so embassy says no, go on.

So well, I thought there was the conference in Israel coming up.

And Andrey was invited.

And my father invited me.

Me and he was going to pay your way.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:46-0:02:47
That was the idea.

Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:48-0:03:26
And he knew he knew you wanted to get married by that point.

Or it didn't matter.

He just invited you anyway.

I mean, did he?

I don't know if he knew.

You know, I would simply say, I don't know, I don't remember that.

Okay.

So anyway, it didn't matter.

That's fine.

We'll just get married.

No, at first I thought, well, why don't we get married in Switzerland on the way?

Because I have an uncle in Switzerland.

So I wrote my uncle.

Which uncle?

Is that Hirsch?

Yeah.

Is he an uncle or a cousin?

Oh, I don't know.

Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 0:03:26-0:03:27
Okay.

He's in Zurich.

SPEAKER_01: 0:03:27-0:06:31
Yeah, yeah.

I met him actually nice man.

Yeah.

Okay.

So you said, why don't you get married to Switzerland?

That would be an easy way to do it.

So I wrote my uncle, but my uncle, as it turned out, was out of town and I either phoned or wrote the embassy or anyway, I went to Zurich and in Surik I went to the appropriate place.

My uncle was out of town, so he could help me.

Where they told me that in Surik, American citizens could no longer get married because they were having too much trouble of American soldiers stationed in Germany coming over to Switzerland getting married because they could not get married in Germany.

So they simply put a stop to all American citizens marriage in Switzerland.

So I said to myself, you know, in the meantime communicating with Angel, well, it doesn't matter when we are on our way to Israel.

The two of you are together.

You're traveling together?

No, no, I went first.

He went to settle things in Switzerland?

Yeah, I see.

And then he joined you.

Well, he didn't join me in Switzerland because he didn't get a visa or something.

He's in Poland.

Okay.

He stays in Poland.

You go to Switzerland.

He said, We'll get married there.

But you're saying, You can't get married there, so on the telephone, you tell me it's not going to work.

It doesn't matter, it's not working.

You know, we can't get married in Switzerland, but it doesn't matter, we're on our way to Israel.

We'll get married in Israel.

Okay.

Well, you know, we get to Israel and we want to get married.

Well, we can't get married in Israel because we have to we have to have whatever, a permission or something from the chief rabbinite or bar thing and you know, well, you know, neither one of us had that because you're not you have to be a Jew.

Well, you'll be Yeah, that's, I mean, this is where the business ends up with your father getting above about Jewishness or something.

So that's why you can't get married because we couldn't because you're not Jewish?

Well, no, they didn't put it that way because we didn't have whatever it is that is needed from the chief rabbinite that we are connected with.

And since we were not connected with any rabbi, okay, you can need a document from the rabbi you're connected with and you're not with the rabbi, something like that.

In other words, this is not a ship where they're saying Israel is not a ship where you go to the ship's captain and say, Marry me.

Right.

It's a country and you have to do what everybody else in the country does which is belong to some sort of supposing somebody So then we talked to learn Yes, that's right.

So we talked to various people because there were lots of people there who we knew who we were sure there were lots of people in the same situation.

They said, Well what Israelis do who don't want a religious marriage is they go to Cyprus.

They go I said I said, Oh, okay, well all right, okay, you know, but it's not that far from going to Cyprus.

SPEAKER_00: 0:06:32-0:06:36
This is you wouldn't believe this.

You're reading this lovely.

SPEAKER_01: 0:06:36-0:07:31
This was so Cyprus, but Cyprus was Cyprus's correspondence was handled by England, by the Embassy of England.

And Cyprus and England at the moment were not on speaking terms of that war going.

Yes.

And so Cyprus was sending mail, returning all correspondence saying unopened or unread.

Therefore, we could not get to Cyprus because there was no way we could get a visa to go to Cyprus.

So then there we were sitting wanting to go to you're in Israel now wanting to go to Cyprus.

So in the meantime, the conference has ended.

The conference has been on all this time.

Is this must be a side topic of conversation in this conference?

So many people have told me about this.

It must have been quite an issue.

Oh, well, I mean, it was so funny.

Because all of these coincidences, you know?

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:31-0:07:32
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:07:32-0:07:41
I mean, in Switzerland, first in Poland, then in Switzerland Israel, one could have foreseen it.

It was nothing unusual Cyprus, you know, it happened to be that war.

That war.

Okay.

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:42-0:08:00
So we thought, okay, so what can we do?

Okay, well this time, even though you don't give a damn whether you're married or not, you're determined to get there was a reason to get married was because there was that Argent might not be able to we wanted to come to United States the year after and that he might not get a visa.

SPEAKER_01: 0:08:02-0:09:00
I guess he was trying to get a visa before and he was having problems or some such thing.

I don't remember that exactly but he's waiting a visa.

There was that motivation.

Okay.

And he couldn't get to the United States without or perhaps he would have gotten a visa for if he as he later was invited to Stanford and just made it easier.

Yeah, yeah.

So then we got in touch with the Italian embassy and wanted to Israel.

Asking if we could get married in Italy and the answer was again at a go to the priest.

It was only religious only religious.

And so then we tried France and France said yes, okay, but you have to be a residence of France.

How do you become a resident?

Well, three months living there.

SPEAKER_00: 0:09:00-0:09:00
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:09:00-0:10:11
Okay.

Well, three months, that was too much because Andre didn't have that much he couldn't stay he had to be back in Poland before the three months.

Okay.

So he couldn't stay in France three months.

Otherwise France would have been okay.

Three months would have been okay.

Such a nice story.

I mean, France accepted people to give it out.

You don't know because you didn't actually try the three months would have gone by and no way they would have put some problem in your way.

So then so then we got in touch with the English Embassy.

I guess my father was still there at the time.

Your father was?

Was still there at the time?

No in Israel in Israel because we were still going wasn't nineteen sixty six.

It might have been it might have been sixty six.

In nineteen sixty six you would have been twenty eight if you were born in thirty eight you were younger than twenty eight.

So it was sixty six.

I think it was sixty four.

Okay.

Okay, so English Embassy, so you got in touch with them.

SPEAKER_00: 0:10:11-0:10:18
And they wrote back and saying, Yes, it's all very well, but we really don't understand why they have to get married in England.

SPEAKER_01: 0:10:20-0:11:40
And this was all by correspondence, telegrams?

This was telegrams because they Auntie didn't have that much time.

I mean, you know, we could everything took time.

Even a telegram at that time took, you know, there weren't faxes, there was an email.

Yeah, so they said okay, but why they didn't say first okay.

They said they said we do not understand Oh, but why England?

Yeah.

Okay.

Uh huh.

And you said no one else will And then we explained to them why England and so they said okay they gave promise country and so he got a so in other words you went to the British embassy in Israel.

Okay.

There were more telegrams back and forth between England and Israel.

I don't remember why exactly.

Yeah.

I mean like it's not a game you know who said England was Yanka Zavodovska and I thought England I mean this is too much England.

But yeah, so it was England.

But you know it's easy to see why somebody might have thought it was It was Israel.

Right, okay.

So where'd you go?

London?

Yeah.

And how long did you stay?

SPEAKER_00: 0:11:41-0:11:54
Well we stayed there for the required number of time, which I don't remember exactly what it was but it wasn't three months Now they had a requirement of either seven days or thirteen days something like that.

SPEAKER_01: 0:11:54-0:16:27
So you stayed a couple you had to stay like a week It was at least a week but it might have been longer.

Okay.

All right, now in this context Bobador seemed to know this story so I presume he was in Jerusalem at the time.

I mean he also knew you were in Boulder later.

Right.

So I don't know where he heard this interchange Exchange.

No, I mean the one I'm getting to where you said to your father that you identified yourself.

You felt that you were identified identified.

I don't know quite what the words are, but you felt Jewish.

That was your identity was Jewish and that Tarsky said no way that you could be Jewish and that was ridiculous.

You were not Jewish and that an argument about whether it was possible for you to think of yourself as Jewish or not in tune with the whole argument about you can't be Jewish unless your mother's that's how Jewishness is determined by the religion or identity of the mother.

So do you remember any and that there was a lot of heat in this argument?

So I guess the question is at any point in your life did you feel Jewish or identify with Jewish causes or Jewish anything?

Well I feel part Jewish.

You do?

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

So you felt more Jewish than your father did at the point at which this argument ensued if it did his I would say that I would when you say you felt more Jewish than he did I it depends on how you look at it I suppose.

In what sense would he not feel Jewish?

I mean he didn't feel the tradition, he wasn't religious, he wasn't Did he feel that he wasn't you know He always said that his primary identity was Polish.

And in other words if you're a Polish, there are Polish Jews who feel like they're Jews first and Poles second.

He always felt like he was Polish first and then some he never denied being Jewish.

He certainly hated antiSemitism and he certainly felt afflicted by antiSemitism by was treated badly because he was a Jew, although he in a sense changed his identity from being more Jewish to being more Polish.

So that's I mean this is something that is somehow we're really going to want to write about in the book because I think it's an interesting cultural thing at a period of time where a lot of people did change their identity But anyway your father actually converted to Catholicism because that becomes meant becoming a Pole.

Well, you see I have heard that said before and I don't think that's exactly how it was.

In Poland it's not that he what does it mean he converted to Catholicism that he believed in Jesus Christ?

No, but he had to become an in Poland you had to write a religion that's what God put in exactly and so instead of putting Jewish, he put Catholic.

He doesn't converted to Catholicism.

Right.

But what happened when he married your mother who was a Catholic, then somehow he just put I mean Same thing.

I mean it's putting it down on paper it had no meaning for him people say he converted to Catholicism as if he became religious.

I mean that's what it usually that's the connotation when you convert to something when you simply put it down because it's required then it's like well you know that's a conclusion Okay so I'll check I'll check Yeah I check Catholic because that's what you have to put.

SPEAKER_00: 0:16:27-0:16:32
But you have to put something and since I don't believe in either Right.

SPEAKER_01: 0:16:32-0:18:43
Well if you had to put something if you were forced to put something what would you put if you were in that situation?

Yeah I don't know I don't know.

I mean you're never forced to do that I was never forced to do that So you can't imagine what you would do.

I think I would think it would make no difference to me whatsoever and I would put what seemed to be the appropriate or the you know since I don't think it's doing anybody any harm no matter what I put you know if this is what difference does it make?

I mean I you see for me that's not an issue.

But it was I guess it was at that time it was an issue because you disidentified yourself from one group and identified yourself with another and the group that you disidentified yourself with was a group that was being persecuted and more and more persecuted.

And so there were a lot of there were a lot of people who resented his doing that.

I am sure and furthermore there are people who said he became interested in Catholic liturgy.

You know how when he gets into something whether he always said he was an atheist, there's no question about that, but he became interested in the practices of the church.

And so there was people made remarks about Tarski being a Catholic Jews who didn't convert, for example, or Jews who did what he did but were less conspicuous about it or maybe didn't marry them and marry a woman who wasn't Jewish.

In any case it was an issue and remained an issue with some people.

So when I heard about when But the argument about your identity with your father and what you thought of yourself as do you remember that at all?

Is that something Magidor made up?

Because he remembers that with some Yeah, I remember.

SPEAKER_00: 0:18:43-0:18:47
Okay so But I mean I don't really remember the details.

SPEAKER_01: 0:18:47-0:24:45
It's that he remembers Charsky saying getting quite agitated agitated as he would and saying There's no way you could think you could think of yourself as a Jew tell me you mean you could think or not but there's no way you could think of that because your mother's not Jewish in that And you argued that whatever you argued that he didn't give the details of the argument all he gave was the was that there was ocean surrounding the I don't remember what arguments I might have given Yeah, but just well I think this son was bothering me just that I think the argument he remembers was simply that you felt Jewish he didn't say part but I felt Yeah and you still do I take it in some way.

Well I feel as much Jewish as Polish.

Okay but I basically feel I mean I would think I have you I'm a member of the human race yeah yeah I asked I mean I haven't asked Jan this question but I would bet that he would feel for some reason my guess is that he would feel less Jewish than you do.

Oh yeah yeah yeah so and why that you said No I just Yeah, why would there be that difference between you?

Yeah because that's another funny story Okay good which has nothing to do with my father That's all right Well my first born friend was Jewish and from his not his parents but grandparents or grandfather or somebody from Minsk Now I don't know if you know Your mother was from Minsk My mother was from Minsk but I don't know if you know that there were two Minsk Two Minsk Well basically my uncle told me this Herschers No Posk right That there were basically two cities and one was Jewish and one was Polish right next to each other But basically there were two cities they were both Minsk and they were but so probably now we would call it one city I see And the funny funny thing is that most of the Jews in Minsk were Bitkovsky Were what?

Vitakovsky Really?

Yes isn't that strange?

Isn't that strange?

Yeah, so what does that mean?

I have no idea you knowkovsky certainly today were Jewish Bykovsky is a Polish name you know but names get changed yeah sure So anyway yeah so probably in that area Vitkovsky was simply very popular last time Anyway so this first boyfriend had a grandfather from Meets Okay this was a boyfriend, a birthday boyfriend?

Yeah so you know he was my boyfriend for a while and then there was somebody else came along and as it turned out he was third generation he wasn't second generation or but he was Jewish the second boy from Jewish upstate from a grandmother from Memphis He also had a grandmother And you wouldn't believe this but I think there was a third well I know the third one was Osher Jewish.

Were the Kosher Jewish you said?

No, they were not kosher it was also Jewish and I thought all your boyfriends were Jewish Until Andre and Andre would joke at that time that the only thing that saved him enabled him to be my boyfriend was the fact that he also had a grandmother from Minsk.

And also had a grandmother He did?

Oh grandmother or grandfather somebody And they were all from Minsk.

That's that is funny Isn't that funny?

I mean you know the way I looked at my selection yeah that it was my selection Precisely Of course I mean of course But I mean they were they were not only Jews, they were Jews from I mean that is amazing But the irony of it is this where your mother comes from not where I mean if they were Jews from Warsaw that would be not quite as funny that it's from where your Catholic Polish mother comes from is where you find the Jews.

Well did you probably know all this?

I don't remember talking to I discuss my boyfriend with them.

That's very good anyway And so you know I realized that there was this I mean So there was a Jewish pull A pull a Jewish pull And does it grow less or more for you you don't even think about it?

SPEAKER_00: 0:24:45-0:24:47
No I don't think about it.

SPEAKER_01: 0:24:48-0:28:37
I mean I basically don't I mean I don't think about being Polish, I don't think about being Jewish, I don't think about being American I don't think about see well I think about being Jewish and yet I'm very secular Jewish and all Jewish but my parents my parents were arreligious so we didn't celebrate holidays or things like that and yet as there's nothing I hardly know what to do with a Passover ceremony Jewish so that feels stronger to me Well in bolder in bolder not only in bolder but in other words I wish I were more observant I can't make it but if I could I would put it that way and like with our grandchildren now who are half their father's Mexican so there's a lot of Mexican tradition there and I wish I could bring more Jewish tradition to them that I myself actually don't have but I do wish you understand so I feel like and yet there's a lot of the Jewish religious tradition and I don't especially care when I go to I love the idea of having a Passover of Saint But a lot of the stuff that's in there just so it's kind of a funny mix Well in Boulder Andre and I had quite a few Jewish friends who were very observed and we would be invited to do holidays What about your kids do they have any feeling about these kids?

You know I tried having Hanukkah for a while but I gave that up because I didn't I guess Well because it wasn't part of my favorite and I didn't know any So I tried a couple times a couple viewers but what do they feel in other words themselves without what you're laying on top?

Do they have any because of our two kids I think one feels more than the other Rachel sort of more Jewish friends it has to do with the friends I think she has too.

Well they I think that all three of them want to feel American Yeah I guess they felt that in Boulder having parents who spoke with an accent was it wasn't just good It was whatever kids feel whether for a while they felt embarrassed about it or for a while they felt they would have preferred that it wasn't so Well what about you when you were where you came from?

You know I didn't have that when I was growing up so that when my kids told me I was really shocked I mean shocked shocked in the sense of surprise I didn't realize that it was an issue You didn't feel embarrassed about your parents' accents?

No I did I did not and you know perhaps because I want to I don't know, maybe because it was Berkeley you know although you know Did you have friends whose parents you probably had a lot of mixed mixed friends maybe the tenth was birthday?

SPEAKER_00: 0:28:38-0:28:39
What did it mean mixed friends?

SPEAKER_01: 0:28:39-0:44:32
Well you know friends whose parents also had accents.

But I didn't have parents many.

There was one other girl let's see when we first came who came from Czechoslovakia like we came from here and she had a very hard time she wasn't liked but I don't know if it was because you were fairly popular in school You had lots of parents Yeah you had a good time you had seems like you had a much easier time than younger Why?

I do yeah yeah Well I do know I do but you did have a you know I had them much easier to unquestionably Because I mean here you are you know boyfriend after boyfriend I had you know I had lots of funny schools Yeah easy But you were a darling girl No Well that's good So anyway you weren't embarrassed so it sounds like you were really pretty comfortable I wasn't I wasn't yeah I wasn't so you were surprised to hear that your kids were?

Yes and your accent was a hell of a lot less than your parents' accent Your accent was Jas was And Boulder isn't Berkeley Yeah but yeah Boulder isn't Berkeley and yeah Boulder isn't Berkeley I mean I thought Boulder was a little more Yeah whereas I know that Micherski's daughter had problems and say no because she was from India because what?

Because she's from India Why is she from India?

Well she's adopted.

Oh you know I've never met Michaels before his wife.

Oh you haven't?

No Oh you enjoy meeting her Oh and you enjoyed they're very nice So she has they have an Indian daughter they adopted a little girl from India And they have a son as well and the son is adopted from Poland.

So it's a Polish son What's she like?

Who misses Amica?

She is very nice very a very good person very you know decent to the tenth degree you know like never never never would she do anything She's she's very nice She's quiet she's the glamorous one.

What's special about him?

He's special, isn't he?

Everybody seems to say so very elegant Who Yeah, maybe everybody says so Well he's charming he has interesting things to say, he likes to joke he is pleasant very even tempered almost almost always you know very even tempered and present.

Well he's kind of charming so yeah he's charming charming nice yeah I don't know if we're not So anyway we're back to this Jude I mean that's really what I wanted to explore was Now there's one question you're probably not going to know the answer to this but I'm going to ask it to you just somebody said that Maria's sister's husband was the director of the Lisa Matarski Tower that one of Maria's sisters her mother that is Well that was a director of the leasing Tarsky got a lot of time off he could take time off, he could go on trips he did a hell of a lot of traveling if you're a high school teacher it's like he had some special dispensation well obviously he was special but I just want somebody said that and somebody in an old Polish person in a letter to me, somebody who had had a course with the Mentat Lisa or something and I've never had any confirmation of that from anyone But I think I know where the firm comes from.

Okay which I don't know I don't know if it makes any sense in going into it.

I don't think it's true because my mother's oldest sister That's Allah No that was Uzepausefa I can ask him because it's my cousins who live next door to me who live in my house It's his grandmother my mother's oldest sister and her husband I never heard that he was the director I'm sure he was not.

Did he work in the situation?

Did he have any position of power?

Not that I mean I always heard that he was very sensitive and he was a poet and then he died very he died when she was pregnant with her first child so that was when his wife, which is my mother's sister The husband died?

Yeah he died in an accident And I always heard I never heard anything of that sort But I can ask my cousin Well was it in other words was there someone in the family who had some power in the administration of that school that gave me Do you know the name?

The name of the school Do you know the name of the person?

No no it was what the letter the name of the person who wrote me the letter?

No name of the person who was the director?

No the school was called Jurumski's Lisse Saud So I believe it was Juromsky who was the director No Jurumsky was the writer it was Jurumsky in honor of the writer Juromsky.

No I don't know the name of the person who was head of the school Because what I think it was is that after her husband died she remained alone for the rest of her life But there was somebody who she had a very deep very deep and meaningful relationship with and I don't know if that person if it was if there was I think from what I read it was a very, very deep meaningful relationship but he was married And I think that person was my head was my own hand So there was some personal connection You know I'm not positive about those connections But that could be could be I mean that's not terribly important but it is interesting that your father was in a position of privilege in that school.

Now of course he was somebody who had a lot of status in the university and his story is anytime he needed to write a paper or needed to do serious work he pretended like he was sick and took two weeks off until he could paper but he was traveling a lot all over the place and if you're supposed to be teaching in a high school somebody could be saying look here you got to meet your class that you've done.

So it seems to me he had a lot of leeway and that this might be a very small detail but just because this I'd never heard it was curious to see it if you'll check it out So if anything like this you know sounds to me that might have been I heard I'm not sure Do you know Vanda's daughter Funk's daughter?

No I don't I mean I have met her when she was a child Yeah and I haven't seen She's not somebody you're in contact with you don't feel positively or negatively in any way about the daughter about Vanda's daughter Does she Because why should it?

I don't know Just because I mean I guess you have certain feelings about Vanga as being in the hospital In the house or I have no feelings about Vanga's daughter no certainly a complication for the other family for divorce She seems to I've been in touch with her because there are she has letters and pictures and exchange things and she lives on the same street now as the Borsuk.

She lives very close so there seems to be there and I know I met Mrs I met Mrs Borsuk when I was in Poland Lovely lady She must be Dossia Dossia very old she's sweet quite a nice person Well she was just a really fun person but I mean I don't know how to win my way in all this How what?

How to win my way in all these perks I don't know who knows what?

Oh well I mean Zosha Mrs Borsuk took in this girl She does she would take her I mean she knows she would She would take her for vacation for all summer.

So the kids are all like sisters and brothers are they?

Or not?

Well they're sisters like the oldest daughter the oldest Worsuck's oldest daughter Elizabeth felt very resentful she did very angry and did not I don't think she became friends with Van Destolin But Magga Lenka did?

She did.

Okay because we met Magga she's sweet as could be.

She's not as fun so because I'll see you know we're going to be in Warsaw again I'm actually going to give a talk in Warsaw you mentioned that and you know I feel like this is delicate stuff I don't like No it's you know I have to you know As I said from I don't know from what age but I think from the time that you know I don't remember Vanda's daughter's name it's Alexandra She just sent me some letters But no misses Morsa would take her to their summer home knowing knowing you know she just accepted the girl and you know saying this happened so it happened but the child is a child and yeah so she became like part of the family in some sense and some family members Well and except for Elizabeth who rejected she was angry at the whole she didn't I mean that was the last that I heard but the last that I heard was from A long time ago she's a pillist now I think and I let's see who did I ask?

I asked Well the link is through Djigorchekorchek Digorchek whose sister is Zosa whose wife's sorry?

Digorchek's wife is Zosa's sister It's all very You know that?

Yeah so she does a sister and they all live on Phil Trumna Street they all live on the same street pretty soon I'm getting this there's all this mail and stuff going on I see they all live in the same like they're right next door to each other so you figure their certain closeness there But also in letters when Wanda was dying there was a great deal of concern about money for Olinka so that Olinka would be provided for and your father was somehow involved in some money that was in the states that was Monda's money that was that So there was a lot of concern, three way concern and this is delicate territory that I don't know how much to assume is comfortable for people I think it's comfortable I think it's comfortable And Elizabeth is very outspoken so yeah well I haven't seen her.

I've seen Manta and I've seen Zasha and there I didn't I mean although I know I don't know a lot but I certainly know parts of the story I didn't want to stop I shouldn't say anything until hello hello so we gotta start walking up the hill You got your jacket I brought my shoes my good shoes with me and I As opposed to your walking shoes Yeah but we can stop at the car and I'll throw some stuff in on the car way up but I'll let you go down into the garage and do that and I owe some money over there because I don't have any money I mean I owe my wine and our drink bill so just go over to that lady and ask her what we owe her.

Okay so that's sort of what I wanted to talk about and I can turn this off but I wanted to get a news.

