SPEAKER_00: 0:00:01-0:00:23
April twenty fifth, nineteen ninety five, we're talking to Hillary Butler.

Just for my own on the other side, especially because on the other side of this tape is an interview with Eric Lana.

Do you know is that probable?

Yeah, right.

So usually I have one.

So you met Tarsky in nineteen fifty seven, that was your first meeting?

SPEAKER_01: 0:00:23-0:00:53
My first meeting was in nineteen fifty seven and I only remember one interaction with him.

It was when Decker was a Persian theorist of Rodkers spoke.

Do you remember Jim Decker?

Jim Decker.

Jim Decker, yeah.

And Tarski got up after Decker's talk and made a sort of parade about I'm not interested in this and I'm not interested in this and I don't have the slightest interest and so on.

SPEAKER_00: 0:00:53-0:00:54
Do you remember that?

SPEAKER_01: 0:00:54-0:01:19
I know.

Very effective.

The interaction was very brief.

I kept up as absolutely fortunately I was not going to master departments.

I was, I think I was actually in the principal department, but still I didn't have to deal with Tarski with someone I had to be afraid of anyway.

I thought these remarks were inappropriate and that they belonged in Professor Tarski's autobiography.

SPEAKER_00: 0:01:19-0:01:21
Yeah.

His biography?

SPEAKER_01: 0:01:21-0:01:39
Yeah, I don't remember his reply, but I remember that five of his students took me out to lunch.

Afterwards afterwards.

His students.

Tarski was so delighted that they took me out to lunch.

Delighted.

Delighted that I had stood up to Tarski.

SPEAKER_00: 0:01:40-0:01:40
Well, what did you say?

SPEAKER_01: 0:01:40-0:01:44
I didn't hear what I just said that I thought Tarski's remarks were appropriate.

SPEAKER_00: 0:01:44-0:01:45
Oh, I see it.

That's fine.

SPEAKER_01: 0:01:46-0:01:48
Tarski's remarks belong in his autobiography.

SPEAKER_00: 0:01:48-0:01:51
Oh, I get oh, I thought you were saying that to me.

No.

SPEAKER_01: 0:01:52-0:02:08
He actually said this in public And the response was that four or five of his graduate students took me out to lunch.

And did he blush when you I don't recall that for me.

I would suspect not No because he did have this if he got angry.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:09-0:02:12
He would blush and his veins would see.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:12-0:02:17
I did not notice such a reaction.

Yeah.

In fact, in the future, he felt very nice to me.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:18-0:02:20
But who took you out?

Do you remember?

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:20-0:02:42
I don't remember at all.

But I was struck by the fact that his own students that his own students were that angry at his human behavior at his behavior because clearly I suspect, obviously I don't know you can conjecture rather than not, but there has to be a history, right?

It isn't Well, he knows his student.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:43-0:02:43
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:43-0:02:57
Well, there had to be some history.

I assume it wasn't just that they were reacting.

But I do remember his talking about after somebody's lecture that this sort of thing doesn't interest him.

That's surprising.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:58-0:02:58
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:58-0:04:03
I mean, his human behavior certainly problems with that.

But he spoke as if this was something that the inference was clear that therefore that his work was no good and was that a wasting her.

I mean, the point was he didn't conceive of it as autobiographical.

He didn't conceive it as his telling us that this work was worthless.

Well, isn't that interesting because of course Decker and Meinho were working closely together and whether Meinho was already at Berkeley but that they were working on the theory of isolates.

I knew Meihel well, so it wouldn't have been Michel, the students I don't remember Well they still And I would certainly remember John Michel.

And one of the ideas was that they thought that their work was related to the older work of Tarsky's on Cardinal Algios but a kind of recursion theory version of things.

So maybe he was missed in some way felt that it was stretching the relationship.

SPEAKER_00: 0:04:04-0:04:31
Do you remember the sequence?

Would this have been after confiod of the conference conference happened?

Because Kreisel was on the attack.

He was attacking Tarski at that meeting and alienate trying to alienate Tarsky's students.

He was successful with Salv at this point.

In other words, he was trying to pull students in his camp.

And it'll be interesting to know at what point in the war that I know.

SPEAKER_01: 0:04:32-0:04:39
We're talking about a third of us more than almost more than a half changes by now.

SPEAKER_00: 0:04:41-0:04:48
You remember CC Chang?

Close to forties.

Right.

Right.

Exactly.

You don't remember CC Chang was one of the ones who talked about?

SPEAKER_01: 0:04:49-0:04:51
Yeah, I would have yes.

SPEAKER_00: 0:04:51-0:04:51
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:04:51-0:05:39
I can't even remember I can remember But you remember five or six?

No, but the point was clearly that it wasn't just he wasn't accusing Decker of misrepresenting his relationship to Taras, he was accusing him of doing work of absolutely no interest.

And that I thought was really and the fact that he put him sort of automographical mold gave me a way of kid of responding.

But I thought there has to be something deeply bad about the relations he had at that time with his students for them to react to a dissuadable remark made to their professor by a perfect stranger.

I mean my experience normally is the other way around the students when somebody criticizes their professor, the students normally would be expected to defend him.

SPEAKER_00: 0:05:40-0:05:55
Yeah.

So I suspected that they were well deeply bad, yes, but complex.

As I say, you know what you're No, it's just it was very complex.

Yeah, that is amazing.

SPEAKER_01: 0:05:55-0:06:02
So no before and after many years later So when did you see him the next time?

Last time I told him how old was he when he died?

SPEAKER_00: 0:06:02-0:06:04
eighty three died.

SPEAKER_01: 0:06:04-0:07:20
Okay, it must have been, I think he was already eighty or eighty one already in his eighties.

And there was a conference at one of the campuses of the SUNY system, I believe it was Rochester.

Something on intuition logic of Rochester with Campus which has somebody who works on intuition and campus I've never been not been to nineteen seventy seven Christgiving with Christgiving with Christgiving So this is the conference Buffalo I was at and that was bigger that's when I first saw Saul Pripy was a high school student Now this was a small symposium But you think you didn't see him between that and the time he was eight?

Well I may have been in meeting another rash another rash But there was a small symptoms and it may have been just myself and maybe one other speaker and he was extremely friendly and very tight and known as I hope to talk to me that he had known through the years he didn't Well yeah so you were never at UCLA.

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:21-0:07:25
I was at Radford Okay but you left the sixties That's right.

SPEAKER_01: 0:07:25-0:07:30
So I think I was at the sixties there into the summer was he there?

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:31-0:07:40
He should have been there you should have been there but I don't remember anything he was there for that year but he was also at Carnap's memorial.

He spoke there.

SPEAKER_01: 0:07:42-0:07:49
He worked there okay I was at the then he and I must both been in UCLA at sixty seven Yes.

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:53-0:08:02
Interaction So you don't aside from that episode what's your picture of him?

SPEAKER_01: 0:08:02-0:11:04
Well I've been talking recently to some people in Poland whose work on is early intellectual history The war suffered Chief Walensky So you've been talking to Walensky or And when he missed Harvard Oh he did Hospital paper that he sent me since and I'm beginning to get a more complex I mean I always obviously thought it worked of great importance and times criticized some claims and so on but no doubt of its importance but I had thought of him as in some ways closer to the Vienna circle than it now appears from Holy sources that he actually was.

He obviously had friendly relations with that he had a lot of contact with friendly relations, that's certainly true but intellectually had quite a lot of responses because he was a very interesting figure.

Well let me take them in geological layers.

First of all, one thing that occurred to me very early was the question of how much quine's famous attack on the analytic synthetic as came not the details of the attack, how much quins must still with me and guess quite plagiarize or anything like that and he obviously didn't, but how much quins are still with me to the analytic synthetic distinction seems so unprecedented The analytic which analytics synthetic distinction senses sharply divide and those two by virtue of meaning and two by virtue of fact.

And I went very early in to get from Tarski always found that distinction unclear dubious nothing that he could rely on.

Was a friend of twice but helped him to get out of Nazi occupied Europe and about to be Nazi occupied Europe and he was a carbon for a year a famous year I think thirty six Tarski No Russell No thirty nine thirty nine was famous But McDonald still remembers he was there as a graduate student Russell Tarski, Karnack, Kwine were all of that in this incredible year and I wondered whether then or whether in part Quine's hostility to the analytically synthetic distinction which he then made epoch and influential in philosophy but whether the idea of rejecting it entirely came from Farski or whether in suddenly he was influenced by Farski without that distinction which would shame one could ask quiet I think I think he could if he were doing this it would be quiet obviously it'd happen to be quiet.

SPEAKER_00: 0:11:04-0:11:25
Yeah, well I've contacted him and he said everything about I know about it's in my book but not that I would ask you Kwine went very early where Kwine's contact with Tarski was in ' thirty six but in Poland Quine went Is that so and he was clearly influenced enormously by his contact with Tarski.

SPEAKER_01: 0:11:25-0:15:12
But about that of course I don't know but that's such a specific Since that's an attitude that Kwine and Tarski shared and that virtually no one else in the world shared it would be good to know whether somebody from Toxic That's one thing that's of great interest.

Let's see I guess I view Tarski's theory of truth itself as something of another idea as not in any way an explication of the ordinary notion of truth.

I think that Tarski himself probably despair explicating the ordinary notion of truth is just an inconsistent notion of it.

But as a replacement for it and a replacement with in some ways quite different properties.

But part of that comes clear I mean the peculiar thing about Tarsky's definition of truth is I once said in a paper that I thought should have been called the nonsemantical definition of truth which obviously confused the discussion by calling it the semantical conception truth because the striking thing of the definition is that no semantical notion occurs in the definition.

Nothing about how the way words are used occurs in the definition in any way shape or form.

This is a paper you wrote Yeah, there's a paper well I remember but the earliest paper I wrote making this point that sharply was a paper called A Comparison of Something and Something Else which I thought was shouldn't literary history of all places it's reprinted in one of my Harvard volumes one of those two Harvard volumes and actually I said he should call it the look no semantics inflection of truth then we would have a good discussion because then one would have included in how can you define truth with no semantic notions at all?

But of course I've more recently appreciated from well that you call my attention to the fact that of course he quite explicitly says that he's taking the notion of meaning for granted that he's applying it to a language whose terms have concrete meanings this notion of having a concrete meaning is one just simply taking for granted which again makes it strange that one thinks that one needs a Tarskian notion of truth to explicate the notion of meaning as Dolph Davison did.

I don't think that's right at all and then I have a chapter on why you couldn't use a Tarskian notion of Truth or Davidson's purposes in a representation of reality or form goes through detail show what those wrong plot Tarskian divides the language as the notion of truth there is so many in meanings here that Davidson's theory really requires an intuitive notion of truth which is quite different than the formal replacement you get from Tarvsky's work.

And Walensky added a bit of information that he didn't know that in that Warsaw group according to discussion group, according to Walensky, Tarsky seemed to be sympathetic to Vertalin sort of realism about me and probably thought under Vertella's influence he couldn't say much about me it's just primitive thing but still what was your impression of Welensky just as a side?

SPEAKER_00: 0:15:13-0:15:24
Just that he knows a lot about Tarsky Did you feel somebody warned me that they didn't feel he was totally reliable in his reports about Versi?

SPEAKER_01: 0:15:24-0:16:50
Now this may have been about historical connections and they're not he knows more than anyone I've met before about that by someone else Now these are these are Warsaw people but younger ones or people But mainly we talked about what about this history about this Warsaw discussion with existence I didn't even know he belonged to which seems to have been quite different it was less ideological in many ways the inner circle Oh yeah and that again set the interesting light that Karski's coming from in a sense of much more European and less committed ambience than Karnat discussion group It had a name so I'm like Well there's this school there's the Warsaw Love School It was apparently a discussion group that met to discuss philosophical issues in Warsaw whose meetings Svarsky often attended Waleski program so you will talk to Waleski I've been in touch with him but there well You could ask him what I meant What he meant What he meant what I'm going to go on too told for you and so here we go Well and in any case what exactly was were these discussions?

SPEAKER_00: 0:16:50-0:17:26
Well there were regular seminars that everybody loved to that you know included Coach Arvinsky and Shirley and with the funnel simply the coach that's in all those people What I'd like to know is where exactly Tarski is supposed to express this symbol effect.

Yeah I have only Bolanski I've never heard that I haven't heard that at all either Well what would be what would make that different than his sympathy for Fred Tony?

SPEAKER_01: 0:17:26-0:33:59
Well again because that would be almost totally opposed to every view of the SO I mean regarded that as extremely metaphysical that as it were underline how far he was from being committed to the whole program, the empiricism and so on.

I mean they saw something there they could use but So how much of his work have you directly engaged yourself with only really I mean at one time I learned this stuff on decision procedure for real fields and so on but the work I've engaged myself in has been the physical significance of the concerns by what it did accomplish and what it did.

So you think Davidson misunderstands how I think David I think in the Twey lectures he said either there or in the seminar that he gave with the Twey lectures that the original paper was based that he did misunderstand but that it was a fruit happy misunderstanding He wouldn't have started the whole program if it hadn't been for that misunderstanding.

The point is you can take an intuitive notion of truth as proven and then try to explicate or provide substitute for the notion of the meaning of the words in the language or you can take the meanings of the words in the language as given meaning as an unexplicated notion which is Tarsky's procedure and try to define truth or at least define the extension of the predicator which is what I say I say what Tarski succeeded in doing is showing that you can precisely capture the extension of the predicator in a formal language and that's a profound and wholly unexpected achievement but you can't do both at once so it really is vicious.

So I don't quite get the first what he what he didn't do.

Well if consider if you define and I spelled this out in that chapter on representation of reality but if you define use a device that's Karnack used in his introduction to semantics and look at what happens if we define true in language that's definite in many sense because the fact that we have to use inductive definitions because they're infinitely many senses and so on doesn't actually affect the philosophical point at all.

So I have a language, an interpreted language, one in which as Tarski says the terms have concrete meanings with two sentences, one in which A means the moon is blue and B means white and I define the predicate in a metal language with progress syntax or whatever, I define the predicate t of x which I can now do x plus at least there's a number of senses is finite as t of x if and only if x is identical with the letter A and one is blue or x dimension B and s no is yarse B says something like this as a possibility considers something like this as a possibility in the barrels Now the point is that the counterfacture A would still be true in this sense property T even if it were used to mean the EFL tower is a million piles high is true because you define it properly which depends only on one fact about the moon, one fact about snow and on whether x is spelled and how x is spelled and no other fact is relevant to whether x or no has this property.

I claim that the intuitive concept of truth refers to a property if it refers to a property at all which is a big controversy about whether it's wholly just disquotational which is a modest attempt to use Tarsky's word in another direction but if true is a property of all it has to be a property which a sentence has or tails have depending on how speakers use it or depending on how they understand it or something like that.

And you get totally different counterfact although true I would say true in Lith is L and the Tarski property property explicitly defined by Tarsky's construction have the same extension Tarski has definitely shown how to capture precisely the set of senses which are true.

The intention if you of course Karski's like one is also highly skeptical about intentional semantics about the intention or just the meaning in an ordinary language sense of meaning or kind of factuals you get about involving synonymous or utterly different from notions.

So this was my principle which I still believe There's also technical precipitation which I made which in a way is among the private level, which is that it's not wholly clear that the convention key itself doesn't presuppose the notion of truth.

He attempts to avoid presupposing the notion of truth by stating in terms of provability rather than truth.

He doesn't require that all instances of T and Metalanguage be true, he only requires that they be provable But that misses the question what if the metal language is incorrect?

So the Omega consists of worse and then so really what you need is What you want is truth What you want is truth and yes So somewhat intuitive notion of truth would argue is still holding the back.

I want to say the fact that the work may not have as solvable softly the problems connected with the notion of truth and I don't think it does doesn't mean that it wasn't an enormous advance both in our understanding and for the reasons I gave yesterday puzzlement.

Well Davidson said he was extremely very, very much influenced by that and used it and that Tarson was extremely pleased that he used it that made the relationship What about Etchemendi's book on The Notion of Logical Consequences Criticisms Trust Brad I don't remember it enough to say why anymore but I was unimpressed at the time very impressed at the time but I would have to go back and look at it again to find out why I remember that Bill Hart with a rather negative review of that book which I rather agree with.

Do you remember where that was?

Bill Hart was at Chicago I think that circle I think that it seemed to me that what was especially I did what was right in it I knew and I thought the claims what it accomplished were overblown especially when imprisons were consulted You started you said or John yesterday said you started at Harvard took courses from Kwine and Wang.

Were you already interested in magic?

Yeah and also took ideal theory theorisk?

No, I student all right there in this story goldman or something I think is golden or something quite obvious I may have lost the name but there wasn't few close to its piece of way we think that's very nice who nothing could wasn't Cariski student By the way would you have known somebody named Marguerite Frank who was Cyriski student?

Cariski student Well their name wasn't Frank then?

No I don't know anymore but So you were already interested in Magic then?

Oh yeah but when did you Where did your interest in Magic come from?

Well I mean it was I didn't my personal standards I didn't really know anything but I learned the girls for the first time in how long second semester of the mathematic course at Harvard and I had read I had read I guess I was as an undergraduate?

No, this was one year at Harvard.

As a graduate As a graduate and I had as an undergraduate I worked at the Calculus of Lander Conversion for some crazy reason.

Where were you an undergraduate?

At Penn but there was no addition to that in either department really.

I had a course in quantification theory for Morty White who left Penn for Harvard the same year I went to Harvard.

But apart from a course in quantification theory for Morty White having read some Lambda conversion on my own the math I learned at ten on my own was things like group theory and group theory and analysis I had to learn any No mathematical philosophy No mathematical philosophy at all.

I read UCLA I read Paul Rosen Rosenboom Rosenboom's book I'm out That was the first real logic I learned and somehow I proved on my own not knowing that Troxenbrog had proved proved Troxenborg's theory and when I learned that some of it had proved it I thought well maybe I could actually I thought well here I am teaching what's called advanced logic in the Princeton Philosophypart over here I'd like to see what I could actually prove with myself so I met Pryson somehow at the Institute and asked him to give me a problem and you know what John said exactly right he gave me a problem This is my first paper I don't even remember which it was now I think it was so lying by Smith Covid That was much later.

My first one was my first paper was some horrendous decision problem which I first brought it in John it's a special case of a stronger theorem that somewhat proved later.

I think it was a decision method for theory of successor and monadic predicates but not building on the whole second order theory that I think got proved decidable later I think that was what I had the first problem that Paisel gave me and he kept after me until I actually wrote it up and sent it to the JSL and so that was fifty five fifty seven What made you leave Harvard after a year by the way?

The gun dog got that way they didn't get any support.

Oh I didn't hear that they didn't get support and UCLA offered you money So at UCLA though did you tie up with the Reckubach Yeah I didn't intend to, I didn't know what about it.

Was it by default or No, he was clearly he was an absolutely great philosopher and a great teacher and So lets see you left though before Montague showed up then Oh yeah And was Kalish there though?

Don Kalish was there Okay TS filed correct yeah so you had grading all these logic papers Sometimes I could say that's where you got fast but checking proofs So were you then thinking of yourself as philosopher of science or I was torn, I was taured but I was still not sure whether I was in the right department or whether I should be taking a PhD in math.

Well that was really although I haven't taken any formal math as an undergraduate I've always studied on my own a little bit more and I think that's part of what drew me to Crystal to make a serious effort to have a second career in mathologic along with my philosophy career and started really I think started about fifty five really spending at least half of my time doing So by fifty five you were at Pennsylvania I take it to fifty three yeah and we that's when we met you or that's seven Well you met in fifty seven but we visited the Institute in ' fifty nine fifty nine six And that's where I remember going to your little house out there wherever that was the student valley fertility valley in those days it was not a student hunting in those days it was a junior faculty cups that's right It was actually wartime hunt like little barracks they bought it from the army from the south and they're still there people are living in students still use students These temporary buildings down here you don't see them from here is where I had my office when I arrived in nineteen no right down below nineteen forty eight temporary They built some they already built some last here Well you should ask more questions because Hillary's connection is much more technical than I do the historical historical social emotional psychological but to you people ask what Tarsky's philosophy really was philosophy and mathematics and several people have said well at one time or another he said things like he's a formalist or a nominalist A nominalist and it's hard to know what that means and also that there's that tension between his consistent use of set theoretical methods.

I'm a tortured nonhorist is a quote I get from that sense where you could define describe quine as a tortured quaver again that suggests one of those issues affidity between this Quine would like to be anomalous but because it doesn't work he is forced to defend his way this but that is too different Have you heard anything along those lines?

No haven't And what do you know about the Warsaw School of Philosophy and Logic?

Not a thing They always claim he does it first What about people like Wesniwsky who appreciated this?

SPEAKER_00: 0:34:01-0:34:21
I really don't I'm not very historical with I know Avash Newski and archaeology I just read there's a piece that we're using the Tartski there's an archive Bankrupt and that's what we're doing today I mean I do it all the time at Salzwood and there's a piece by Kotarvinsky on Lizhnevsky where he talks about neurology.

SPEAKER_01: 0:34:22-0:35:05
But I must admit I've never been much interested in the history of politics I had to know that theorists were already proved that it's about it.

Did you have any significant contact with any Karski students?

That's probably starski sports what else What's your just your picture of the man, just the physical picture?

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:05-0:35:10
It's certainly interesting to see how people see him or do you have Or do you retain one?

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:10-0:35:30
No, I don't retain one I sort of face but as I say he was surprisingly the last time I saw him he was surprisingly gentle and I'd like to close my memory of it that way that way I don't even remember his stature exactly tall or short that I remember.

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:30-0:36:02
Well yeah a lot of people go you know stocky robust but he was to some people he was extremely short and Napoleonic other people don't see him that way But that's a fairly constant is that Napoleonic thing fits with a statement but you don't and a lot of people want to tie it to a statue almost clich like tying it to a statue but the physical picture isn't something that sticks with you.

SPEAKER_01: 0:36:02-0:37:28
It's more the strongest thing is that first assertion making assertion and then a bellowing more standulous Do you think Turski's role in shaping how modern logic looks was essential in any way or certainly the technique of truth definition is essential far outside formless matters one can imagine Cohen's work exactly without that I think that that probably had more impact than the work on Alga Bro that he seemed to have regarded as well as the secret of this project at least for the last twenty years or thirty years of his life seems to have both philosophically and mathematically that will actually transform how we're able to think about things once we are torture.

Yes, but he himself wouldn't have foreseen that of course like a lot of things If you were to rank logicians I mean this is a terrible game Well let me just ask a question about would you rank him among the greatest logicians ever?

SPEAKER_00: 0:37:28-0:37:55
Oh certainly After Aristotle Pan Tarski is start playing the game Okay but you put him in that line Aristotle because many people do but there are people who when it comes to Tarsky and Girdle, Sal won't put those two equal I mean he votes for Girdle but a lot of people make that more equal What's your goals?

SPEAKER_01: 0:37:56-0:40:03
Well Tarsky Girdle First I would put I would keep No I guess I think Girdle is I would prepare with all Tarski Yeah But then there are people who don't want to look at very And by the way that burdened Tarski terribly he felt very burdened by that obviously the law has been done build in a way on very little stuff if you don't know about the diagonal see what the problem the difficulty is that has to be overcome and after all the idea of a hierarchical solution is already brusse as church rights out Principia is a hierarchical solution to the Semetical Paradox not just to the Setheric paradox under the interpretation of Russell intended and it seems to work in that sense and that there was also pull off something that managed more than once my cross is that the same magician did both the things really quite incredible and the thing is Tartsky was onto this to a certain point and that I think just it really it bothered him for the rest of his life that he didn't do it and there are clues about it that he like he almost did it but Saul's feelings he wasn't going at it the right way might not have it as I understand his attack was but it did really affect the game and there's this whole part of Tarski is always wanting every shred and iota of credit he can get for every single thing that he was in any way connected with.

SPEAKER_00: 0:40:04-0:43:17
And some of this people interpret as stemming from the fact that it stems from a lot of it but it also stems from the fact that here was something that he just missed and so he met her everything else that's out there available that he can attribute to himself because one of the things about his attitude towards the problems of the students is he competed with his students and a student couldn't do something that he suggested without Tarsky having his work A lack of generosity one's work should be better than ambition Well it's fun Philosophy One reason I like philosophy better than mathematics is mathematics in a way it's inevitable it's a competition in a way that it seems to me philosophy I mean I think maybe you have to be ambitious when you're young because maybe you won't achieve anything if you're not ambitious when you're young but at a certain point I think at least in eventually condition corrupts the work I thought I have two senses of One is to actually achieve something great and the other is to recognize ego ego I think ego I think for up to the word The thing about him though what Ego did was it was more than ego for himself.

There was an ego for his field.

He was a tremendous build over that is in a sense his crowning achievement the school he built and he had the achievement of he had the experience of being able to get twice first as a Jew and then as a logician among mathematicians I mean I remember you know maybe twenty years ago Momfort Tain as far as I'm concerned very well isn't logic isn't a mathematician I mean that prejudice since a lot of them took money to become computer scientists Move for himself, they toned down a bit I know after a lot of them took chairs in computer science, they toned down their tone rhetoric No but that I think was a formidable thing that admirable formidable thing that he did was to build what he built and to do it to do it he just was relentless relentless reestablishing you know and having the effects here so that is but they see that's ambition and it's the most positive But it's also ego because it places him in the seat he was shameless I mean I was talking to people about him and Lehman the statistician and these two guys were the same they were absolutely shameless in what they asked for and what and therefore got.

I mean they were willing to do it and expected it and expected it.

I mean and there was there was just zero it was awkward and zero embarrassment Well for me it was always somewhat of a confrontation Can I get this for someone else?

SPEAKER_01: 0:43:18-0:43:35
No, but I mean building the for any mathematician and you work on the Hilbridg tank problem Oh yeah that was pure transition for sure You don't feel that way so much can you do it before somebody else does?

SPEAKER_00: 0:43:35-0:43:39
No comes with age I think that No, but I don't think so ever did.

SPEAKER_01: 0:43:39-0:43:52
But it doesn't mean to say why am I attaching so much importance to that comes later at least?

I think we should stop.

We should tell Brett Surely Brett were saying.

