SPEAKER_00: 0:00:37-0:09:40
This is in preparation for an interview with Alexandra Shmilaf Ola in Warsaw on june thirtieth, nineteen ninety seven.

six year old I'm not saying.

Yeah, but something maybe nineteen sixty you were about six years old.

I think so.

Yeah.

I remember that when he will then when he came, it was very funny because he smoke all the time.

Yes.

And for me it was very disgusting.

No.

I like it.

Oh you liked it because no person in my era don't smoke.

Yes right.

So you must have been the only person who liked he smoked And he smoked a cigarette Little cigars it was this finish the end of these cigars was made plastic and take them He gave them to you.

Yeah that's great.

Yeah.

I don't remember much.

Well that's a nice end.

But you liked him Yes and I think I wrote the letters for him when I was girl.

Yes, yeah.

But I don't remember this Yeah and but your mother asked you to write it maybe Maybe I think I have contact with him but I don't remember but in every letter I think he was in Poland when I was tour three times.

He came to Poland until nineteen sixty eight.

nineteen sixty eight I think was the last time he came So you were fourteen fourteen?

You were born?

Yeah, so then you were fourteen.

But every time he came he came to see you of course he brought me some presents very bright and I all the time have this present from him because it was the very nice books about animals and visualized jewelry He gave you books about jewelry or he gave you jewelry He gave you jewelry He gave you books about animals with always jewelry with turquoise and silver.

Silver Yeah Latin Indian Indian.

This is an Indian rug with ring with turquoise and coral I mean with silver and coral but more typical is with the turquoise and so he gave you that kind of jewelry and in every letter that he wrote to your mother that you sent to me he always asks about you.

Yeah.

So obviously you were very important to him.

Yeah, no, he can't.

I mean, certainly your mother was very important to him.

Did she talk about him a lot with you?

I mean did you hear her Not too much because didn't talk too much You and your mother?

Yeah she didn't confide in you.

She didn't tell you her emotions your mother.

Most mothers don't tell their daughters what they're I think it's I don't want to speak May You didn't want to talk to her so in one of the things that in those letters from the Tarski to Manu is that in nineteen seventy nineteen seventy this year there was a meeting in Nice and in those letters Tarski keeps writing will she mean will she come to Nice or not?

Because if she's going to come, he'll come but if she's not going to come maybe he won't come.

And he seemed to make his plans he was going to go several places East, Germany, someplace else.

But very much of it seemed to depend on whether Landa was going to come or not.

And she never committed herself.

She wouldn't say whether she was coming, whether she wasn't coming.

And it was very interesting because I was wondering why at that point in nineteen seventy it would make so much difference to him in terms of his plans whether he would go to that meeting or not.

Do you have any idea about why she No, why would he at that point make everything that he was planning to do depend on what she would If you come in it was like if you come then I'll go.

If you don't come, maybe I won't go.

You understand you have no idea about that.

So she did you know what their relationship was Vanda and your father?

I mean Tarski and your father.

Did you guess at their personality?

Friendly.

Just friendly.

Just close friends.

Yeah.

I'm sure.

Yeah, right.

But they stayed very, very close, you know, forever.

They were very close friends.

Maybe but I think that he went to USA in many years ago and I think this is on friendless.

When my mother maybe it's the same problems scientific connection No, but it was stronger than just Yeah, right.

Yeah, no, they were it more was more than a scientific connection.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, it was a very close connection.

I told I told I know for me it's an uncle question.

He's like an uncle.

Yeah, right.

But did you have other friends that were like uncles in other words for your mother?

Well my mother did men from clothes like that, yeah.

So he was he was like a main bird suits and Moshinski who?

Moshinska Maria Moshinska.

Moshinska Right.

This is her friends, but she's in USA I don't know.

Yeah, right.

Yeah.

But as far as in Poland, these were just her three friends.

Yeah.

And but they were I mean Tarsky was an extremely loyal, loyal, close, close friend over the you know.

I think so.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

I mean, although he had other I don't know many about it.

Yeah, it's just not nothing that you had information about it.

And she didn't she didn't talk about it.

Yeah.

default: 0:09:42-0:09:42
Okay.

SPEAKER_00: 0:09:44-0:46:59
So what's your impression of him besides that he brought you presents and he what kind of a person do you think he was?

Sorry, but I'm so I will say young and I don't remember well.

You don't remember him though.

I better remember that he claimed that he gave me for example this person, but I don't remember exactly this person.

I think that maybe they go away and I'm not sure if he was in our apartment very many of times.

I don't I know that I think he was in Red Carino.

This place near World So of course country place Country Place Yes maybe.

Uh huh.

So you think they went there?

Maybe.

Yeah.

Did they get together with when Tarksky came, did they get together with Vorsuch and you know like in a big group with Vonda and the whole family get together?

We don't remember that I didn't but without me Without you if they did Yeah But if you in general I think your feeling about him is quite positive.

Like a nice uncle Yeah a nice uncle you were always happy to see him nice.

Yeah.

Well you know he wasn't such a good father to his own children.

I don't know if you know that but to his own children he was a very difficult father I know that it was some problems.

Yeah.

It was a very difficult father for them.

Yeah.

Sounds like he was a better uncle than a father.

Maybe he wanted they be genius Geniuses probably but he probably also made it very hard for them to be geniuses.

One time he is in Poland with Ina.

Yes.

I remember now I remember it was some party at the Borus and I remember Inla.

Yes, you remember her because maybe I was interesting with her because she was a girl.

Yes Elder than me but still right But it was I think the first maybe not in six years one of the first coming One of the first visitors I think right And I said sometimes my mother said me about Ina because maybe this is interesting for me she don't say me about Tarski because I am a girl maybe it's not interesting for me.

Sure.

So she taught me and about she said that she has a baby and she really I think that she is like some hippie She's like a hippie?

Yeah did she And that in her apartment is very messy I've heard that from other people too I think it's interesting for me.

Yes Right Well Edith came and lived in Poland for a while.

Eda married Erinforth I don't know if you know that name and they lived in Poland for a few years in Warsaw but in which when she was she was born in thirty eight.

In the sixties in the nineteen sixties.

She lived with Aaron Foy before they actually got married but I think they got married in nineteen sixty four.

Eina was born in nineteen thirty eight Eno was born just before Just before No, she was born in Poland in Poland before Twitzki La.

Eno was young now What does she do now?

Yeah.

I don't think she has a regular job.

She has she had three children and one of them has a child so she helps out there.

She and Aaronforth were separated and the children went back and forth between Aaronforth lived in Boulder, Colorado and she and they lived together for a while.

She lives in Berkeley.

So she would the children sort of went back and forth I think the relations Eno's relations with Aaron Ford stormy couple So there was a lot of breaking up and coming together.

I think even now they're separated but not officially divorced.

And now she's in Colorado again because one of her daughters is there.

But you never met her daughters the children so you only met And did you ever meet Jan the younger boy?

I heard about Jan I heard that was some problems covid him.

Yeah, with Yan and the Harski.

Yeah, they didn't speak to each other for a good many years that happened.

Yeah but now Enon lived in Europe quite a bit.

He lived in Poland, he lived in Trieste, he lived in France.

He was traveled and never had a permanent He became a physicist but he never settled in one place but now he's back in Berkeley and he lives in the house that they lived in.

He lives in the same house that Tarski lived in down below and he rents it up and Ena lives not so far away when she's in.

But she's very nice and I like it.

I look back I like Lau, but Eina's very nice.

But they had a difficult childhood I think their years as children were difficult because first place they had all the war in Poland and then they came to Berkeley and then change of culture too they came to a father they really didn't know and then he was a difficult father very demanding not like the nice uncle so they had that problem So you don't remember so much more than that Sorry about that no but it's nice to but it's interesting about the smoking and the pictures are nice.

And then your mother your mother was sick for how long before she died?

How long she How long was she sick?

Very sick before she was six years Six years.

She was sick a long time But did she suffer Yeah I think so.

But this last time because she all the time was very active But I mean was she in pain?

Do you think while she had no All the time I was absent at home because I was in school and nothing more so where did you go to school Near Posen I see and after I do my study in Traffic So you weren't home during the year And she died in what year?

seventeen sixty six Well I know that he was very very upset by I heard that Tarski Tarski was very upset and unhappy very But he never writes to me.

He didn't write to you.

He never wrote you a letter of condolence or anything like that.

No, we haven't had contact I have the contact with Ritarski in my childhood only in my childhood Yeah and after that he didn't Maybe it's my fault, I don't know maybe he write and I answer answer it's very possible because I don't like to write letters and I was when I was young I was very difficult to and maybe maybe something happens this maybe this is probably very personal but how were your relations with your mother easy or difficult?

You had difficult relations with my mother a good contact?

You did not have good contact.

From when to when?

When?

Yeah, when was the period of your difficulty with your mother?

Snow when I was maybe sixteen teenage and then from then on And it never did you reestablish at the end or not It's not real Yeah quite good but not very close Not too close You know she went to I mean in some of the letters there was discussion of money and she wanted to be sure that you had her house and all that sort of thing.

Were you aware of that then?

No, we lived together.

Yes we have an apartment under each other No Madova Madova is here near Oak Town You live there We lived there with my mother Yeah and after her death Yes I changed that kind of a lot because I don't like the place You don't like the place but didn't you have inherit some building in other words so there was some financial arrangement after your mother died where there was Yeah No I don't You don't understand money Your mother had some money in the United States and she wanted to be sure that you got it.

Yeah.

Do you know about that?

Yeah.

But there was a lot of correspondence About this?

Yeah.

About this moment to be sure that there was whatever was left would be for you.

Yes, but I think in a moment it's not a big problem because in Poland today we can have a control and after I think I had this Yeah, you got it, I know, but there was a lot of but I haven't you haven't let it I don't have it anymore No it's just that stuff now we're not in big Yeah no my point is that there was a lot of concern about it.

They cared cared about it.

Because I know in Poland it's a problem to have money from person.

Yeah.

But what I mean is she cared that you would get it.

She wanted it not just for herself, she wanted it for you so I don't know if you knew that then but hey I think either spent well because I built summer house in the country It's a very small but because this money was very, very big for example twelve years ago but I never used them they stay in a bank and a moment in the way I use them they are small Now you have a son is that right?

And how old is he?

He's thirteen he's thirteen and he lives with you now?

No and now he spends vacation holiday with his grant grandfather Right so you're his father's father yeah and you're divorced from his father?

You didn't marry?

Yeah, but we have a conversation and he also sees his father so he's close to him he's nice boy but difficult your boy you mean?

Yeah he's thirteen thirteen very difficult age but so he doesn't he spends time with his grandfather all the time or just Oh his father is very now he's old if he's grandfather yeah he's very different Yeah so yeah But normally he lives with you your son in Warsaw And you live but you live on Phil Trava right next to the Borsuks in the same building or what?

Does everybody you now where do you live now?

On Phil Travo in Kitrova Near Borso But not in the same place No Not in the same building The next building But you see misses Borzok, you see Russia is she for me it's very very awful that's a very Because when my mother went to United States I always stayed with them with them I say she lived with the family there so she so they're like your closest they're real closest people I think that she's more close to me than my mom is.

Yeah because she's a very nice lady she really is very sweet so you although she's much she's more like a grandmother right misses Borston she's almost much older than her mother was now she's eighty eight Yep so she's more like a grandmother in a way or between a grandmother I can think of so many other questions to ask you, but maybe you can think of something else that you remember Did you think he was when you were a child, did you think he was funny looking or good looking or I better know him from the post?

Yeah from the pictures well what do you think from the pictures?

How would you think of the pictures, do you think he's a funny looking man a handsome man Interesting interesting face Do you think he has an interesting face you like his face?

Yeah I think you know this is a picture of his face I have the focus of his picture Well that makes him look more handsome than he really was It makes him look the best he could possibly look but there's also that picture that is from Nova Sabir's the nineteen sixty six one that everybody see that's a common picture Oh that he looks very good in that one and that looks something like the Vitassi picture that's the best photograph but the Mitcasi picture of course makes him look better than he looked in life I think But you liked his face But I don't I think that he's short short but I don't remember him You don't think of him never thought of him as short but you were Yeah.

Well that's interesting because there are people who think of him first thing you say is Well what do you think Charsky is like?

What does he look like?

And they'll say Oh he's very short That's the first thing.

But there are other people who don't say that and then you say, Well do you think he does he give you the impression of being very short and they say no so it sometimes people think of size like that but to me he's always seemed very short quite a short man And I think to you too you used to think he was short very active nervous, he was a nervous man always moving around.

He could never sat still very much he was moving back and forth a lot Letter now came Pardon Miss Bos Yeah No Mara Yes well I talked to her last year and she told me you know she told me about the trip they took and she liked him a lot Yeah he had many aspects to him many sides in the cold and here she had pink car maybe What was he?

To contact the owner of the car a car that's carry this So different people have different feelings about him and some people have very strong feelings about him.

I think that for me he was funny and I think that maybe he spent with me sometimes asking asking No, no speaking with me maybe Yeah I'm sure he always he gives me the presence from his all excursion from his trauma from Greece or Oh wherever he traveled Wherever he went Greece Greece or whatever country he went he gave him or he would send he would send them to you in the mail, you would get a package and when my mother was in USA or he met meet with him she brings from him So he always had you and you were somebody very, very special for him No, I think so I don't know of anybody else I don't know I mean I know a lot about him by now.

I don't know of anybody else.

Can you think of anybody else where he was so interested in a child in a child?

No he would be nice to people's children for a minute but this is very special So you had a special honor whether you know it or not he did he liked being an uncle Yeah he liked being no he liked being Ola's uncle I think he liked being your uncle Well I think it probably I would guess that it had that you must have been a charming child I think about And I think it has to do with your friendship with your mother right Oh my English is No If I keep talking it will improve I think that my son is better than you do he probably started learning sooner in school Now it's lessons of English teaching English is better and he goes to private school and they have English every day Every day Right What school does he go to?

What's the name of the school private school?

It's not really private in Poland they have they are it is organized by parents By the parents and we pay and all this money they are the first school So it's kind of a cooperative cooperative teacher?

Yeah But who are the teachers?

Regular teachers but no money the money doesn't come from the government just from the parents Expensive It's very expensive And where is that?

Right in also in Warsaw And the children who go there are mostly children of who?

No because ten years ago in Poland there can be a private school yet but ten years ago they start school opened this school and it's the intelligence intelligentsia Yeah Ted was the children of intelligence but now it changed because in Genesia have no money and in our school in this class The lower grades lower grades classes when they want to be in this school and we speak with them because I am in this committee Yeah all the time there are computer firms computers firms or lawyers or sometimes doctors Doctors Private doctors intelligence no more intelligence here No they have no money because it's five hundred by month Well what do you consider yourself?

Are you intelligentia or I'm very according to because I'm not a scientific No but in institute but still you use your money to send your son to school I can work sometimes more than my job that we do extra side jobs he don't like the school he doesn't like it anyway because she said that it's two small classes and he everything what he do is known He knows it already the teachers know everything about children like this Oh okay yeah or they hear the teachers They prefer to stay in normal school because it's for example normal school is thirty five forty sometimes children in one class and teachers do The teachers don't know what you're doing he sounds very, very smart Charming Charming Charming boy Yeah What are his interests What's he interested in?

He's very intelligent Very intelligent but here don't want to learn He doesn't want to study But that'll change Maybe.

Yeah.

What about you?

Did you want to study?

No, not you.

But it changed?

You still don't want to study But he's good in computers he likes that history and geography he likes that But he can do everything because the teacher said that he is very, very gifted depends but he don't want but he will normal I think Yeah Depends Does he like sports?

Not too much Not too much Does he like music?

Yeah Does he have friends?

Yeah, lots of friends.

He likes his friends Maybe Jane Share it's quite cool huh?

Yeah any time that you have this appointment at seven three oh but here most of the time we don't have to Do you think children feel freer more free now than ten years ago?

Yes they are more free I think that is another style of the parents the parents are free for free and in school it's the same they have a very they think that they are very important and they when you know they was very they are very have a feeling about themselves themselves I think that it's good but it's very difficult to deal with for example when I said you must go to sleep for example he said no one Smile Yes problem not yours I think but what about you with your mother?

When your mother said I think you must go to sleep if your mother said to you I think you must go to sleep then you went to sleep When I was twelve years old Yeah when I was sixteen I said no and I go away So it sounds like you were pretty independent also You had a strong feeling of yourself as well your mother was also a very extremely independent Nepal Despotic Despotic was she authoritarian Authoritarian Authoritarian But she was very authoritarian towards you or towards everybody not just you, everybody.

I think everybody Yes right But I think she was also a very independent woman for her time She did what she wanted to do She didn't care about what other people thought, right?

She just she felt very important and very selfassured and she just she was going to do things her way I mean but you might not like it you might not have liked it as a daughter and other people might not have liked it as out there but she didn't care nice but you might be calling for me it's very difficult I have these letters but I think these copies they are Waltwood Yes.

These are the letters you sent me already The same copies were fine but I don't know do you have any copies of letters she wrote to him letters that So we have the letters that Tarski wrote to her, but did she make copies of letters that she wrote to him?

This is her That's her writing So what was she writing on the back of she was writing on the back of old paper?

Mathematics Mathematics So I think it's You think it's all mathematics?

This is mathematics it's not letters This is Yeah, right letters This not No, but I mean in the letters is she writing about what is all this that's being crossed out?

Because it's blue it's not only you know it's when he write She write him to him Yeah then Dear Fred And she tried to write it and does she do this in she changed what she said she edited and then this is not what she sent.

These were the Yeah But it's very difficult to read yeah Okay well maybe what do you think Song?

That would be so hard for us to decipher not this Maria her other friend Maria what is her most She's dead is that right or is she still alive?

Huh?

No She's still alive She's And she's in Warsaw?

Yeah Does she speak English?

Yeah She's probably the person to talk to you are you in touch with her Do you keep in touch with her?

No she's not in loss because she's in holiday But are you I mean you have an address and a telephone But I'm not sure that she will know Tarski No but she might know she is more that she's younger Yeah but she might know what your mother had to say about Tarski more than you.

In other words, if she was a close friend she would confide she would tell your mother things about Tarski.

