SPEAKER_01: 0:00:00-0:00:24
He felt Griddle was ultimately paranoid and deranged, but I think that's hard to disagree with.

Well, that his views were very strange in that Yeah, but I don't think Platonism sort of went hand in hand with a kind of But I didn't feelism.

I don't feel contempt.

I guess that I don't go.

SPEAKER_00: 0:00:24-0:00:24
Okay.

SPEAKER_01: 0:00:25-0:01:45
My good government that government.

Okay.

But anyway, let's talk more about what Tarski's view of Girdel was.

But Tarski I never hid from Tarski my platonism at all.

I mean, I was I knew he would disapprove of.

I'm a platonist.

You're a platonist, yes.

And well, the thing is Tarski was a tiny bit of a platonist himself.

He had this whole thing about Tahara keeps talking about this, how he thought of it as sort of like a fairy tale, but he loves believing in fairy tales.

It comes out sort of that way.

He thinks it's beautiful notion.

So I don't think he would have certainly wouldn't have contempt for a complateness for Question is this enough done slightly pink.

Oh, well let's have the just this part.

So let's have the unpinked start with the unpinked part and then I'll put that back on the pen for a second.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:02-0:02:03
I'll start with this.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:06-0:02:12
So at any rate, he didn't discuss those views, particularly Girdle's platonistic views.

No, he did.

Oh, he did.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:12-0:02:12
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:13-0:02:59
Sorry.

And he disagreed with them, but he respected them.

Now he did not respect Hilbert's formalism.

He thought this was and he did not respect the Vienna circle.

And why was that?

He thought this that these views were shallow and irresponsible and Irresponsible and what shallow I can see the motion.

I guess this is all right.

Pass your point over.

Okay.

SPEAKER_00: 0:03:05-0:03:07
Okay, what?

SPEAKER_01: 0:03:09-0:09:11
Are you giving me a separate little piece?

I don't know where I am on this.

You clicked that to an end, didn't you?

Yeah, I don't know whether I did the other side though.

You want me to look What size tapes do you have?

I have nineties, so forty five minutes each.

So that's when my mine stopped at forty five.

Oh so okay, so we okay, so I think this is I heard it click when just mine click, right?

Yeah, so you're a ninety also, right?

And did you turn it over?

No, I'm not Oh because you hadn't come to the end?

No.

Well, if I'm if I'm going to do the other side I'm standing That's right, that's right.

That's yeah, it should go that way.

Normally this thing turns over by itself.

You mean it just reverse self reversal yeah I don't think no.

Yeah I'd be gotten into real trouble fast forward some of this.

Okay and then this is the way this is some other you're recording over something, okay?

You're really brave when I've done that now Okay You rolling?

Okay now we're rolling OK What I like about yours is your mic is out here so you don't have to stand it up that way whereas my mic is here and well I guess I could lie it down, I just never feel as happy with it.

Tarsk you know that platonism and belief in God are entirely separate philosophies I mean there's no connection there's no logical or conceptual connection between them.

And in fact there are religious people that take the belief in eternally existing abstract objects to somehow be antireligious that these are that this is a belief that conflicts with belief belief in God Nevertheless, there have been people down through the ages that have connected the two and Platonism and belief in God?

Yeah right.

And Tarski was one of them Tarski felt that And Tarski strongly disapproved of religion so it was his He said so to you?

Yes there Matthew that's a piece of papaya I don't know if you're going to want to eat the skin I mean not papaya mango.

I opened our papaya and it didn't taste like anything so you're going to eat the mango.

Those mangoes are crazy.

Yeah, the reason I say he said so too because you know at a certain point he became Catholic and there are people who thought that he got very interested in the liturgy.

Although he always said he was an atheist, he got very interested in the Catholic liturgy.

So this is a side issue that I want you to keep in mind.

Yeah, Gervant told me that and when I pressed Gervant on it, he became very vague about it.

Well, I've got a couple of stories from Sammy Eilenberg who remembers certain not very specific things, but things in Poland way back.

But I don't want to get distracted with that.

I just wondered if Caarsky himself ever talked to you about how it was that he converted to Catholicism.

In fact, I feel I was surprised to find this out and I feel that it was almost dishonest of him not to tell me about it because we had extensive discussions about our separate religious upbringing How interesting and our views about Judaism, Catholicism.

My wife is Jewish.

I was brought up as a Catholic.

My sister married a Jewish man who at the time was my best friend.

In other words, some of your best friends are Jews?

My Well that beans are fabulous.

Thank you.

Oh we're supposed to have a pee.

Where'd that pee go?

They each have a pee from our garden.

Where'd they go?

In with In the beans or on the plate?

SPEAKER_00: 0:09:11-0:09:13
No, I guess I got more than one pee.

SPEAKER_01: 0:09:13-0:15:03
This is it.

Wait, that's just come from the garden.

Do I have a pea?

Yep.

Where?

I put it on your plate.

These are the first ones of the year?

Yes, absolutely.

I mean, I've eaten two raw, but those just came off the my little pea plants this morning.

Well, maybe I ate mine and didn't even notice.

You're sure you gave me one, so I am.

I've just been so excited by this nondiscussion of Catholicism that I just don't notice my pee going down.

Well, I wish we had a lot of time so I could tell you some of the varieties of what people said.

A lot of people imagine that he did it when he went to Marry Maria, but he had done it years before.

It went it coincided with the name change and that was done for in other words, you had to put down some religion.

And if you weren't going to put down Jewish, well what else was there to put down?

This is Eno's interpretation of what it meant to him.

But other people have other interpretations of what it all meant.

But it is surprising that he never told you that he had done it.

I'm sure you've heard this from other people.

I mean, he told this to me like it was a standard thing that he said that there were three religions in Poland Judaism, Catholicism, and communism and they were all dedicated to gaining control.

The Catholics wanted to control your sex life and then communists wanted to control your economic life and the Jews wanted to control your food life.

Your what's on your food?

Food life.

And he didn't like any of it.

Now that's great.

I thought that religion was a tool of oppression Well, I'm glad to hear that that he said that specifically to you because I've never heard Oh you haven't heard that with that?

No, I haven't heard that I mean, I've heard him say that he was an atheist, but I never heard him actually say that religion was a tool of repression.

So that he talked about antiSemitism to you?

Yeah, he thought it was a mystery that he had no idea how this could be.

He had no idea how it could exist in the human heart.

Really?

Yeah, that this none of the explanations that he had heard made any sense to him that sounded plausible.

The business of the Catholics thinking that the Jews killed Christ is just too absurd to take seriously.

And there are lots of anti Semitic people that have no devotion to religion.

Yeah.

Well, there are so many other reasons besides religious reasons, economic reasons, business, scapegoating, whatever but with a lot of people, he wasn't at all upfront about being Jewish himself.

A lot of people were very surprised to find out that he was Jewish.

People to this day, there are people to this day who don't didn't know he was Jewish.

So I mean, there was a I think he had a lot of ambivalence about being part of that group which for some reason a lot of people didn't like.

And I think he never kind of got cleared up When did you become such an admirer of Turkey?

It's an interesting question, it's a good question probably in the early sixties sometime in the sixties.

SPEAKER_00: 0:15:04-0:15:07
What was it before you came to Berkeley York?

SPEAKER_01: 0:15:08-0:18:26
Probably but I remember in nineteen sixty five or sixty six I was giving a seminar in logic at Penn and I wanted to use logic semantics and mathematics and found out that it was out of print then.

You said fifty five fifty six?

No, no, sixty sixty five sixty six I'm taught it penned from sixty five to sixty nine.

So I was I guess you could say an admirer of Tarski then if I wanted to use that book in a seminar that's a lover of admiration.

Had you ever heard him talk or this initial admiration came only from reading his work?

First time I heard him talk was in Stanford at that time That talk that logical thing.

Was that a knockout to you?

No It wasn't The talk was not a knockout.

It was about it was very technical and it was about something that I was very fuzzy about although I had studied it, I didn't get the point of what he was trying to do so it wasn't a knockout because well you gathered from Giavant's piece how people just used to sit on the edge of their chairs when he gave lectures and they really were taken with his way of speaking, of teaching, of lecturing.

I mean Tesal can describe how what his first reaction to him was which was just kind of bowled over at the way he presented material.

But that was with you it was from the written work.

No I never heard him give actually his lecture in Berkeley I forgot what year this was when I think it was seventy four when he gave the distinguished professor lecture that one?

No, it was What are logical notions?

That was a knockout.

That was a very accessible Did you go to the symposium for his seventieth birthday?

Were you there?

SPEAKER_00: 0:18:26-0:18:26
No.

SPEAKER_01: 0:18:26-0:20:22
You didn't go there I went to his Berkeley Canitation lecture and how was that?

I thought it was awful.

Did you?

Yeah and if I'm not mistaken they made fun of him in the newspapers the next day that day four grass is green the sentence that grass is green is true if another one's grass is green instead of snow is white or snow is white or whatever the snow is white is the old By the way that example Snow is white is in Boulev.

I don't know whether Tarski knew that Tarski had read read a lot of these historical things and had very clear what the mathematical content of a lot of them was.

But he didn't take credit for Snow as life No, I think he is ten minutes to one, let's see.

So what you're going to leave What you talk is the talks at one fifteen By the time you get there and park Well I could one thing I could do is drive you down so you wouldn't have to park that and then what would that help?

Yeah come pick us up Come pick you up And then your office hours are when?

Well then I'll go back later.

Yeah, that's what I mean.

So I can come pick you up then we can have a little more time to talk.

How would that be?

SPEAKER_00: 0:20:22-0:20:23
Fine.

SPEAKER_01: 0:20:23-0:26:24
Okay, we can have our dessert then.

Okay, so in that case we could leave at one, huh?

Right, we have a little salad and I'll drive you down.

Okay because otherwise it'd be passing your plate there looks like and John's right in the middle of a bite.

All right John John, one thing I find very heavy intarse Okay you want more please sir and we seem to take seriously is this concept of the methodology of deductive sciences.

First of all, just the words themselves seem very ponderous and they're not although metamathematics certainly doesn't cover everything We're head, brand of redirect That his conception of that is supposed to cover.

Still, metamathematics that's catchy and it instantly gives you this idea of well since it's meta it carries a lot of suggestive freight with it that I think there's a reason that mostly people say they're doing better mathematics if they're doing anything like that.

Well there's a how do you feel about that?

Meta mathematics doesn't take into account the gap between Kantian and traditional views of the nature of mathematics.

You can say metamathematics and you can study the Cantian tradition where mathematics was basically carried out by means of constructions and is devoid of the idea of the information of a mathematical science being concentrated in the axioms and deduction as the method of deriving truths from truths already established.

But the methodology of deductive sciences has a traditional and almost well it's not anti Kantian, but it's asserting the tradition in the face of the Kantian This methodology of deductive sciences is much more in the tradition of the American postulate theorists, Huntington, Devlin, the Italians that inspired them, Piano, Cottowa, The German's Passion, Hilbert Frege, Descartes, Pascal, it's something that reaffirms a tradition that goes back to Aristotle.

So now I don't know whether Tarski by the way, Tarski read Pascal and was surprised to find out later how influenced he had been by Haschfeld.

In the new German edition of actually, it might even be in the forty sixth edition.

Bet originally pointed this out to Tarski and Tarski Bett.

Everett Bett.

Yes, yep.

By the way, I pointed this out that Tarski independently I had not heard of Bet connection, and he informed me that Bette had already pointed this out and that he had already acknowledged the connection in print and showed me where it was acknowledged.

We should leave in five minutes Okay, I'm ready to go.

Whenever you're ready to jump up, I've got my glasses ready.

Did you hang my keys back up on the board?

Okay, I'll hook you down.

Where will you want me to take you to?

I can just go around and bring you up the oval, huh?

Okay.

SPEAKER_00: 0:26:28-0:26:31
John also wants me to Xerox something.

SPEAKER_01: 0:26:31-0:33:28
Before the top.

Yeah.

Okay.

I mean, if the time is real short, we don't have to do that.

Does he give out something to the audience, but we can get along without it.

I was going to write it on the board anyway, so we can skip that.

Okay, well, maybe we should go and just come back.

Let's see what I just checked something I want to see.

Tarski's been called by various people we've interviewed, everything from gangster, tyrant, saint, God.

So where do you put them on any scale?

Well, I loved Tarski and I still miss him.

You loved him personally?

Yeah.

And I couldn't believe that he died.

I felt that he I had never articulated this, but when he died, I was surprised, even though I knew he was sick.

And I later figured out that I thought he was so smart that he would figure out some way around us.

Good, so you practically do put him in the God category.

He had a lot of faults.

Yeah.

He was a god like a great god, not like a Christian or Jewish God.

Right.

He was exasperating.

He was stingy with money and he was he was greedy with money and greedy with glory and very suspicious.

Suspicious Suspicious.

It took a long time for him to trust somebody nothing.

I knew this about him and Hackett wanted to pay me to work on this book.

And I refused even a nickel.

And the reason I refused a nickel is because I knew no matter how small an amount I took, Tarsky would figure out some way where this was being greedy or cheap of me to do this.

And I said to myself, Alfred, I'm going to outsmart you this time.

I'm not taking anything.

Okay, so why didn't you love him?

Because everything you've said is like No, you know, he was extremely knowledgeable.

He was dedicated, he had a dedication to justice and objectivity, decency that was very rare.

And he had charm and he loved fun.

It was fun to be around him.

He told jokes and he loved to listen to jokes and he knew when a joke had been told right.

You know, there are a lot of people, you can tell them a really excellent joke and nothing.

They don't know a good joke when either.

But he was he thought he had a good sense of humor.

He was fun to be around and he was loving funny little ways thoughtful.

To you personally or to me personally what you observed him do towards others to me personally got an example Well what he wrote in logics and it's not a mathematics was Yeah generous No something more humble.

He gave me I told him I was trying to buy a copy of complete series and he wrote it through his library and sound and extra copy of music in it and wrote something nice in it.

Did you ever tell him how much you loved him?

No did you say things like about his work to praise his work to him?

Did you do that?

I would say not in any direction Not anyway not as such.

I mean I may have said something I've said something that implies like this is a wonderful appreciation of it but I did not by the way presuming to give Tarski a compliment is not something that you take on lightly.

You know, if you compliment somebody you're setting yourself on a plane near the airplane and I have seen many great men refute compliments by lesser mortals.

SPEAKER_00: 0:33:29-0:33:30
Right.

Right.

SPEAKER_01: 0:33:30-0:35:18
Not because they didn't think that the compliment was justified but because they didn't want to let that person think that they were qualified to give it Miho was Was he like that?

Yeah really He was a real That's interesting.

Annocent person in many ways.

Although he's another guy that had a loving side to him too.

And a very generous Well Tarski had a generous side to him in terms of giving gifts to people that's kind of surprising.

I mean particularly to the Poles in need.

I mean, this monetary concrete stuff.

Now that might have been a lot of Maria's doing too, but they were sending off packages very early and responding to that kind of physical needs that people had.

An odd mixture of things.

So that waits for the fruit Let me ask a question.

Speaking of offering Tarski compliments he received three honorary degrees one from Chile, one from Calgary and one from Marseille.

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:18-0:35:21
And I wonder that he never received one in the United States?

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:22-0:35:37
Well I can tell you why I never got one from Buffalo.

Because of my health.

How?

No, it was me that arranged for churches honorary degree from Buffalo.

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:38-0:35:39
No.

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:39-0:38:42
No and I wanted I wanted to get to get one for Tarsi first.

Before church Yeah.

So when was churches nineteen ninety five wound up Okay And when did you start working on getting Tarski wind in maybe nineteen seventy nine or so?

Okay and Nihill mixed it.

What?

He let it be known that he would fight this tooth and nail, that he would not sign on to this.

Oh really?

Yeah I never didn't know that they had bad relations, did you?

No.

Mayhel was as nutty as a fruitcake.

We knew Mihil.

Yeah.

If you brought it up another day, if I had brought it up say a day before I brought it up or a day after I brought it up he might have Might have said okay But once he said he never says let me think about it or no but I might change my mind or it's no and then there are reasons that follow from laws of logic why you're a jerk for even thinking of doing it.

So that's the buffalo.

Why do you think Qine didn't try to get him an honorary degree at Harvard or Queenie at Wisconsin or Church at Princeton?

Yeah.

Maybe it takes a younger person to go to bath for you.

I mean Varina went to bath for him in Calgary Ann Preler and Ann Preler and Frais in Marseille and Shwaki in Chile.

Okay?

Those were all devoted those were all devoted students or young colleagues and so forth.

Did Freisay ever work with?

He was in Berkeley for a while Yeah, but not he worked with him but as opposed to Yeah.

It might have been already well established.

It might have been Preller, but I'm sure it was Preller who did all the hard stuff probably or not sure I would guess it sounds like have you ever met her and Preville?

I'm sure I have.

Yeah, pardon?

You have I'm sure I have, but I Yeah remember Well she's somebody who puts him on the God plane.

She's the one who specifically used that word.

Do you know Weby Richard Weby?

No He knows a hell of a lot about Parson.

SPEAKER_00: 0:38:42-0:38:42
Oh really?

SPEAKER_01: 0:38:43-0:39:06
Why?

He was a graduate student at Berkeley for a long time and do you know that name?

No, never heard it.

Wow In fact I can give you his phone number.

Where does he live?

He lives over in Countra Casta in Belga and he would love to know To tell stories?

SPEAKER_00: 0:39:06-0:39:06
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:39:07-0:44:54
Was he philosophy or a math student?

Philosophy but very knowledgeable mathematics When what period?

He was one of my teachers at Hopkins I would say nineteen sixty Oh and he also he'd studied with Karnack before he came to Berkeley.

Oh yeah.

You said right you were in Chicago with I think Chicago.

He knows a lot about Tuski's afraid with that woman that was secretary or something Oh does he?

About Dorothy Wolf?

Yeah I've talked to Dorothy Wolf.

She doesn't want to talk much which is understandable No, it's not.

It's such it's lucky it's thirty thirty five years ago or something like that.

Might do her good.

Huh?

Might do her good?

Actually the first time I spoke to her her present husband was dying.

He's now dead.

The second time but she indicated that she was kind of reluctant.

The second time it was more like why would you want to write a biography about this guy anyway?

And why if you did, why would you want to write about this?

Well it just happens that the affair with Dorothy was what precipitated it was the straw that precipitated Maria's moving out of the house and so it's crucial for that reason and it sort of changed things in a certain way, although not another selfish side of him.

Oh, his relation with Maria?

No.

Tell me about it.

Well, tell me what you know about it or what he told you No, I mean he when I came on the scene they were back together.

They were back together again and which was when you came sixty four No I didn't really have any relationship to him of any importance until Well nineteen seventy four came to Buffalo and gave the chocolate No well the reason I jumped on that is because different people give different dates for when Maria actually moved back in but all the time that they were separated he was going over to her house for lunch.

Yeah they were always together.

They never were really totally apart but they came very close to divorcing.

In fact, a lot of people thought they were divorced, but they never did divorce.

And so forth.

But yes, but she was I mean my question was because I wondered whether you thought she was actually back in the house in ' sixty four because there was argument among various people about I mean people who know the children We can tell you that.

Okay, well we'll see the upcoming.

Did you see Tarski in contact with his children how he behaved with them?

Oh because they were all grown seventies they were all gone by then.

No, I met Jan through Alfred but I didn't get any feel for that relationship.

Terrible.

Absolutely terrible.

And now Jan is the standard bearer for Alfa I talked to Jan a couple of days ago.

Yeah he's dear.

He's been very helpful and so and he's been friends to me.

Yeah.

Yeah, he's really Oh I meant to tell you that the we were talking about my not getting any money for it going on like that.

After Tarski died, you know, I worked for Hackett as a consultant He sent me something to review.

By the way he used to send me things that he knew I knew nothing about books and to write referees reports because he thought I had very good judgment Good taste The character of the author.

He even gave me a book of poetry to review one time.

Yeah, so I made three hundred dollars a year book of poetry.

Now is he still alive?

No but at any rate oh you might talk to his wife who is a charming person and very close to him and a high officer in the Hackett Publishing Company about the relationship.

And the guy now that is the president and CEO was involved in this project and has husband interaction with Tarski.

Why did Hackett tell you what did Hackett tell you about Tarski besides the right stuff that he had the right stuff?

What was it that charmed him so much?

Let's just let it roll.

I wonder if I could do my wife?

SPEAKER_00: 0:44:55-0:44:55
You think you could?

SPEAKER_01: 0:44:56-0:46:31
Okay then we'll answer it.

We do have a machine on so let's go Oh meant to tell you before we get too far off it bring it up Yeah my wife is very phone smart so whatever the smart thing to do she'll do it.

On the phone Yeah like maybe she'll call back in five minutes or Oh okay Good well we'll see they will know that she's loving for now.

Uh huh Oh no she would not be because she's going to be at the film festival until five After Tarski died I'm still working for Hackett and I was working on something for him and he called me up about it.

And I said by the way Bill, how is the logic semantics metamathematics selling?

And he said that company policy is that the only people that get reports on the sales of the book are people who are getting royalties.

Therefore I am awarding you one percent royalties.

