SPEAKER_00: 0:00:07-0:16:50
But I remember kind of the idea of it.

Right.

Julia, first Julia never gossip.

Julia never gossiped.

She didn't talk about people.

She didn't.

She never than it well, a little more than Raphael.

But for instance, her friend Lizal Gallery mentioned the fact that Julia and I and Lizo had all been married so long.

Trita said not Lizal.

Turned out she'd been divorced for, I don't know how long.

So you get the picture.

Yeah, yeah.

I got a little message that you were getting kind of discouraged with the idea.

Is that right?

From who?

From as I read your what you wrote in your letter that you were kind of considering maybe abandoning the Well, it goes in hot hot and cold.

I consider I'm actually high on it right now.

Oh I'm glad to hear that.

Yeah, yeah, good.

No, but Julia never complained about Tarsky to you?

No.

Not seeing one?

I mean, I never heard of a student of his who didn't complain for one reason or another.

Are you there?

Yeah.

You're thinking first of all, as I say something that she talked about.

And you know, she mentions in that he decided this wasn't enough for a thesis or something.

But she never complained about it.

Why not?

Why wouldn't you complain about that if you were struggling along with something she agreed with she agreed with him?

I've forgotten just what it was, but she thought it was later embodied in her thesis as a part.

I think it was It's all written up in there, but I don't know the details.

But no, she had great admiration for him, and I don't mean it was, you know, just adoring admiration.

But I really never remember her complaining about complaining.

I've heard from other people that the Robinsons did not like the Torskis for example.

Well, I wouldn't certainly like is a kind of odd word.

Yeah.

Certainly, for example, Julia and Raphael didn't drink.

Yeah.

That they were certainly Julia was not open to affairs.

Right.

That I don't think that the word like, you know, apparently Raphael talked often to Tarski.

Just told me quite south that Tarski had great respect for Raphael.

Yeah.

There's nothing of that sort, I don't think that I can because I'm hearing a lot of stuff from other people too.

You know, it's not people volunteer, people volunteer information.

Kathleen Morowitz came up with something.

This had nothing to do with Tarski, but just as an example, you know, we had this big thing about Jenny Harrison.

And Jenny Harrison wanted to have a series of Julia Robinson Memorial Lectures, which Raphael and I, caught unawares, kind of agreed to, and then when we heard about really well, they were typical of her, the people who she just wanted absolute control of these things and so forth.

And they were really kind of a continuation of this anti departmental thing or more in the department.

And there was this discussion about whether Julia was denied tenure at Berkeley and so forth.

Kathleen told me that Julia had said to her once that what she really liked was a job she shared with Raphael.

Now she never said anything like this to me, but it has the ring of truth.

Sure, sure.

Because Raphael wanted to retire early and do more mathematics, and Julia, after her operation, was getting to the point where she could do more, and it was the kind of at that time, fairly creative idea you would say.

So I said to Raphael, I asked Raphael about it, and he said he never heard anything like that, but she doesn't pay that much attention to things.

Right, or it could have been something she thought of in her heart of hearts and didn't say to anybody except Kathleen, you know?

Just come up casually in a conversation Kathleen also was talking to women in relationships.

Sure there.

Sure.

Now, I wanted to say I hope I can come tomorrow.

But I would like to hear what other people react without giving my reactions because I come from a different point of view.

Sure, sure.

But I want to hear what your reactions are too.

Yes.

And I just And I also have Dan reads the artist.

Dan being a much better critic than I am.

I start to rewrite things in my own way.

Sure, of course.

But I have good things and then criticisms.

Yeah, but I will just sit back.

Well, no, I think it's of value for you to say what you have to say at some point, because this isn't just Oh, yes.

I think No, I don't mean just to me.

I mean, I think the point of this seminar is for everybody to hear what people have to say about other people's work because that's as valuable as having it sometimes as having it said about your own work.

This I agree.

Yeah, I just wanted to hear what people who were not in any connection mathematically, yeah.

Me too, me too.

But I also want to hear what you have to say and keep secret.

Yeah, right.

And the thing is that I'm already rewriting that first chapter in my head.

I haven't done it, but I already once it got finished as finished as it is, I immediately and then I read it, I immediately see what's missing and so forth and so on.

So don't have any hesitancy about yeah, right.

You know, that's what you that's what I'm after, yeah.

But wait, wait, since you're not going to talk to me at all about Julie tomorrow, I just I am hearing things from different people, and so I want to when you hear things, you want to hear either more of the same or you want to hear contradictory evidence, you know, so I do want to talk to you and tomorrow may not be the day.

And once I tell you certain things that if I tell you things that other people have said about their experience or even about Julia, then maybe that will trigger things in your mind.

It's possible Just as the Marwitz thing comes up now as we talk where you might not have thought of it before.

Well, I never would have I never heard it.

Yeah, well that's what I mean.

You might not have volunteered as authentic.

Right, you might not have volunteered it though, as my point is.

You might not have volunteered it if I say, Well, tell me about Julia and you say I have nothing to say and then I know something comes up in conversation You know all about that.

Yes, you've done enough interviews to know Right, very definitely What I wanted to ask you what about the Tarski papers?

What about them?

Do they exist?

You mean is there a collective work?

Well no, I meant like at the library Yeah in Bancroft there's a whole archive.

I haven't gotten there yet, which of course I should have done before this chapter but you have to call them up.

I have things from the department.

They aren't easily easily accessible but they are there and they're not cataloged as far as I know very well.

I don't and this is probably a lot of stuff.

Yeah but there's stuff and I've been in touch with the I've been in touch with the archivist and all I've got to do is give him a give him a week's notice and he'll get them there for me.

They're not even housed in the regular library.

They're warehoused somewhere.

And so but it's not that I can't get them And Jan has a tremendous amount of stuff, Jan Tarski and he has been extremely cooperative.

He's really been helping me.

Oh I think that they are very anxious to have something done.

Well not Eina, I don't think Eina.

Eina couldn't care less.

I've never met her.

I know yeah that he is.

So does he have personal letters from I don't think he has personal letters.

No.

That's that's I think that's the hardest thing is getting some early personality.

I have been so fortunate in this show.

Yeah I know that when I wrote Hilbert the first draft well alright you know but when I got the Minkowski letters came to life because not only did you have the letters that gave you the man if you had the man, everything else became more important and interesting about him.

And I just wondered if there was anything from his various women friends?

I don't know.

I've gotten a lot of stories from women friends but what they don't, what's fascinating is he didn't do he didn't do pillow talk with his women friends that had to do with his early life.

You know, usually people will that's who people tell stories about when they were no zero who I mean I just reached everybody I've talked to and I've talked to a few and you know and people aren't too depending on who it is, they aren't too anxious to talk about that relationship that they had with Tripi.

But in the past Well you know and I mean I still may I may get stuff but it seems as though for example Varena she said he just didn't tell her anything about his early life.

Well of course the thing is that the life in Poland it's not just his early life it's thirty eight years the baby life professional life No, I thought a lot about that.

No, it's what went on it's family dynamics that I had zero about that I want would love to know something about the sort of thing that I had from Heyenaert where I knew really knew what went on You're not likely to get that No I know I got you know You had both your own relationship No I had a lot of people there and the kids and Yeah but here there's family after all these kids but it was the kind of family where nobody talked about that kind of stuff.

I mean that in itself is interesting that in the Tarski family in Berkeley nobody talked about what it was like to be nobody knew anything about the parents relationship when they met.

I mean they're little.

Anyway, I don't have to go into all that but I'm getting I got a couple of things from somebody named Peter Hoffman.

Do you know who he was?

Well he's somebody who apparently got fairly close to Tarski and is at the University of Reno.

And he has some stories that they apparently got very close.

So Peter Hoffman has some little stories that Tarski told him.

For example, things like this business story about him being taunted as a Jew.

You know, nobody else had anything like that and that comes from him having told Peter Hoffman about that.

So if I can get more little scraps like that I got another did you read in the I think it was the September nineteenth New Yorker the story about Richard Holmes Yeah I'm taking bringing that with me to that was incredible that struck me there in relation to where you had the quotations of the book how smoothly these quotes were worked in in the chronological order of his life that that was I had just been to the you know how I attended the Malcolm Mason trial a year and a half ago and I missed the first week of it.

So Monday I went down to hear the opening statements and also I was interested in how it would have changed now that the New Yorker is out and so one of the subjects of conversation was those famous New Yorker monologues nobody talks like that and then after that I was reading the whole thing and I thought that this was just done so skillfully I don't know who the author was, I'd forgotten the whole thing James Atwood who the biographer himself.

Anyway, I will enter in, but I have some things to say on the mathematical aspect and stuff and I want to hear what the reaction of just people who aren't.

Yeah, well there's not enough in there is there?

I can hardly hear you on it.

Oh I'm sorry.

Yeah it's a beautiful red tone but it's not monotonous Not very good, huh?

Yeah you should have heard my conversation with Raphael last night.

I asked him if you had interviewed him and he said no he still do he was not a very good interview.

And well I should still do it.

Well I don't think you don't think I should ask him what Darski's principal achievement was and asked him a couple of questions.

Nowhere.

Just nowhere.

Yeah.

Anyway.

But anyway I will see you tomorrow and maybe we could see each other before.

Yeah, the only Well that might not be a bad idea maybe we had over there an hour before or something.

You decide and let me know.

I want to go down and I have to do this guy at Illinois, Bruce Resnik has gotten a book that was remaindered at Caltech which is Belong Cell.

But before it belonged to Bell it belonged to a man named Juan Kain Walker and Bruce has gotten so fascinated in tracking down Juan Kain Walker that with my permission he is writing an article called The Search for Lon Kain Walker.

I told him was at Stanford a little bit I would check out So you're going to go down to the library and stuff for him.

It's much work.

Okay, well why don't we meet an hour ahead of time?

All right, let's see I'm just trying to think I don't know whether that room is actually available.

Well why don't we just meet the car we can set out why don't we just meet there and if nobody's going to be in there we'll just do it there and if we have to move we'll move.

All right, three o'clock at Earwig then.

Okay good.

Sorry I didn't call before but no, that's okay.

I didn't know when hectic around here.

Yeah when did you get that manuscript by the way?

I'm curious.

I got the manuscript when you know when must have been Widd Pardon?

What was it Monday?

Either Monday or Saturday it would have come like Saturday Okay my son and daughterinlaw were here so it's a little confusing Okay I think possibly it came Saturday.

Okay that's good because then I know how fast things travel which is pretty good.

I mailed it Friday so that's great.

Oh that would be good Monday okay so I'll see you at three I'll see you at three tomorrow bye Ray, I know that's great yeah yeah we struggled over that for a long time I resisted that first Yes But I liked it right away I mean trying to song there were a million titles that I went through but once I got that title I really liked that title and I think it really works and I think that's how I'm trying to think of a title almost before I start this thing but that may be wrong I don't know But I don't know and I don't know quite I don't even know quite what I want to do.

Have you looked back at building this has taken a lot of time coming down off of this there's still a lot going I still got a lot of stuff to do but still I think if I got into doing something else it would be good rather than to keep focusing on this thinking You had read the book without knowing Anita Plans what would you think What kind of book would you expect her to write next?

SPEAKER_01: 0:16:59-0:17:25
I mean I think biography makes a lot of sense for Barnes biography more than something political or social so I would think biography would be just that I have a passion for the life to dramatize that and then I'll get on me but I don't know how a living person who have a real thing for.

SPEAKER_00: 0:17:26-0:24:03
I don't know that I could do a job on based on library research.

I don't think you could.

I don't think you'd be interested I think what you like is interviews Yeah getting an interview but why would you do it on somebody?

Well because there aren't very many biographies that are viable on living people.

This one just turned out to be a because he died and because he died in the way that he did it's a whole other thing but most biographies aren't written about living except movie star biographers and everything so I don't know I could see you doing a book like you'd find a group of people who are really interested in you and you would have their words and you would interview them and have their words and then write your own take on something.

So it wouldn't just be strictly them editing their words but it would be their voice and then your voice and then another person's voice and maybe it would be how you some kind of memoir like thing in your voice because I think that's also I think you have a real to that anyway I really don't know I'd love something to just hit me in the face and say make me feel like this is what I want to do and I haven't really had that maybe a bath to somebody Yeah there was this thing that was offered to me that was a strange thing.

The wife of Morton Sobel who was Sobel was a Rosenberg associate Julius Henel Rosenberg's friend who was sentenced He was sentenced to prison for something like fifteen or twenty years and he practically did nothing.

I mean he was probably guilty of something but he was sentenced to prison for I think perjury or spying or something and what he was accused of and sentenced for was probably less than much more than what he actually did but they nailed it and there were other people I think the Rosenberg brotherinlaw turned state's evidence so he got off real easy and this guy was in prison for twenty years.

So his wife is here and she's written this huge amount of stuff about how they were all wronged and it's like we're innocent and this guy was framed and she also wrote him letters into prison and so it's not just about the situation it's about their relationship and eventually when he got out of prison not long afterwards they divorced and it's one of those things then she herself has a PhD in computer science and etc etc she's in an old people's home now or she's in her convalescent home she's only in her mid or early seventies but she wanted somebody to just in a sense edit her stuff.

She wants control of the stuff and all this stuff I mean I just felt like I couldn't do that what I would be doing is just doing some copy editing or text editing and not be allowed to present to attack this from a what do you mean by this?

What do you mean by that how can you say that is so and this is so to be able to come at it from at least a neutral position so there was but once I was offered it I began to get a little bit interested in it and to notice things as long as they can Yes please that had a certain interest Did you look at the at some of those manuscripts and some of the writings in detail They don't have detail they usually do I think the electric avenue Oh I see so yeah it was interesting but it was so one sided and I can't take that money I have such a contentious nature whenever anybody tells me something I argue or you always want to know why I mean right yeah I mean you could probably make that so much better but you might not be interviewed No like she wouldn't want to do it, she wouldn't permit it.

She wants control but you still have control and you could still say You need to answer this question But then I mean what's in it for me?

You know it'd be a constant struggle and it's not my mission to get everything out and have somebody too who's so boring I do feel the guy was probably screwed I feel that but I don't feel he was totally innocent he just didn't surface surface impression.

What you would be good at is like just some of those New York like could you see I didn't read it all the way through but that New Yorker thing about the family Yeah I love that's the kind of thing you could do is be able to get in and ask the questions and offered to observe and that's the writing I can see you really doing sort of stuff I love to do but I mean I think those and something shorter but then you know getting your stuff in the New Yorker from I know I'm not saying fully just anyhow New Yorker Yeah What do you guys think?

It's so ugly it just drives me crazy I hate the visuals I hate the visuals like the way it says I don't like on that story it would have the subtitle of each page that seems ridiculous.

I hate the table contents No, I don't mind the table contents I hate the awkward in it.

It's all you know it's all very early this kind of cartoons pictures I just have a thing I have just I think it's why we for the stomach reaction because I don't like her, I don't like no we didn't talk about you don't like her No, I don't like it at all I don't like her yell but I mean I think it's easier to find things that what everybody says when that's obvious.

It's all choppy though I mean like there's a story and then there's another thing set on the side of the page that clip there's a lot of short stuff So you still subscribe to that?

Yeah, I mean I still find things in there I like to read.

SPEAKER_01: 0:24:03-0:24:12
It's just it's juicy we have a subscription that runs till July June of July so But I don't think that was cancel.

You wouldn't cancel it.

SPEAKER_00: 0:24:12-0:27:48
I don't think so.

It seems to me I get a lot of information from that and it's so disconcerned I mean it's just sad because Borden had to screw up that one that was the one that was like really good It was really good but it's so thick I mean it must be a success story It must be a success story from that point of view financially because they were losing a lot of money.

Did you see the last issue did you see the last tissue has these ads in it that are I think were those Johnny Rersace again?

Yeah I think they were Johnny Rosachi but you know one of those things of ten pages of very hermaphroditic people one man and two women these very colorful clothes but I mean everybody got their kits hanging out so fun New Yorker it's beyond belief but to size like you feel like a voyeur every time you look at it and I've looked at it about twenty times the guy the guy is so feminine looking and the two women the two women he has this long kind of marcell hair he looks like a sphinx you haven't seen it and actually your description is so clear I have the exact idea The first thing looks like the two of them are buried in the sand up to here it looks like the Becket thing from Endgame only two beautiful young people and then like you said about three different women that are interchanged and there's one guy with his hair very feminine body It's hilarious I don't know did you see a Madonna's book?

No I'm afraid I tried to see it so I kind of this place where I go down to write a really dank root place with like a big room placed desks and it's as bomb funny as can be and then someone brought this book and someone borrowed a copy and left it there for everyone to look to it and nobody wanted to be caught looking out just to the TV library and let everybody watch you look at it but in the week it was a long time but the whole thing was mangled by I was supposed to be very serious you know talk I know I know if you saw that it was hidden in that Vanity Fair article I just thought I used to like her I did it really did I don't know this just did it This did it for me too exactly too bad.

I thought it was because of this article I read that you know she No, I didn't even read anything this whole bit just going a little She didn't go much farther but she just went a little far It's a shame.

I mean she's really interesting to I saw this movie Metropolis this whole movie Metropolis and then there was a movie that she made that was or something that she did that was Metropolis is a Fritz Lang movie from nineteen thirties or twenties about an automated automated city.

It's a really interesting movie you'll see it sometimes in the Museum of Modern Art or something like that and then she did something that was a take off based on consciously it was interesting again it wasn't as good as Metropolis but it was interesting and then you felt that she was after something and with this you know she just got bad advice although she doesn't seem like she's something you would get this sort of puts her on the level with Michael Jackson or something like that to be a different way.

SPEAKER_01: 0:27:49-0:27:55
It's been that way for a long time that she was trying to make that kind of public figure of herself.

SPEAKER_00: 0:27:55-0:27:56
Well yeah but it was interesting.

SPEAKER_01: 0:27:56-0:28:58
I mean, she was a much more interesting public figure to me than Jack seemed like it was more bearing her listening more about her problems being shown and the other ones seemed like she was taking some of the sort of social issues and trying to be saying like she's doing this let's go get some fruit heritage and stay with her that's what Addie's gonna do Israel Israeli I'm going to get I'm going to have to leave pretty soon I just put the meter till one hundred twenty so if you want to stay longer I can add What time do you have to leave?

I should leave I have a two forty flight and have returned to car so I think I should leave here by about one hundred thirty Well I'm the latest Yeah one hundred twenty is good We'll go out I'll go out to it.

I'll go sit outside anyway for watching I think I should probably leave Don't leave quite yet I won't No thanks

