SPEAKER_01: 0:00:00-0:10:24
 Okay, this is... You want to repeat what you just said?  Oh, believe me, I know that issue very well, but I can't do that. I'm not going to forget it.  Because that's the question. Sure. So the question that I foresaw,  and maybe finally I'm going to get an answer from somebody about this issue, is...  On May 9th, 2015.  After we went through a delicious dinner that made me very full with lots of pasta.  Well, it was a dinner that I could not have created myself.  Well, it was so complex. So I asked Sol the question of why people found, many people,  almost everybody I talked to that was not just a friend, found Montague, like a non-academic friend, found Montague intimidating?  Well, I could not say that I observed him myself, but I can project myself into  situations in which, partly in which I heard about and partly in which I would guess about his personality, that he took over from Tarski,  I believe, and that was that you had to do things a certain way and that there were criterions of doing things right that  if you didn't meet those criteria would create a reaction that people on the receiving end would consider to be intimidating.  I see.  And Tarski was similar in this respect?  Definitely, yes.  So it just happens I was reading a bulletin from MSRI, which is the Mathematical Sciences Research  Institute, about a woman who had donated a considerable amount of money to something something that MSRI represents or carries on.  This woman was in a seminar with her husband  in a Tarski seminar, and her husband, Ed,  was totally hopeless in front of Tarski.  He could never do anything right,  and Tarski. He could never do anything right. And Tarski would keep interrupting him and  saying, no, no, that's, you know, and totally undermining. He would not let the person proceed.  The wife, I don't remember if she ever presented in a seminar, but she ended up being her own  person and contributed to MSRI, which is a totally separate thing. But it reminded me  of that situation with Tarski where it was just, the guy was hopeless. I would have considered him hopeless, but I would not have destroyed him in the way  that Tarski did by saying, not letting him get off the ground because he couldn't put  the right words on the black border, he couldn't formulate things in the right way.  So that's what I mean by intimidation.  And I think Monogu learned that from Tarski.  Maybe he had it in his native personality. That's what he liked to do anyhow. I don't know, but I can imagine him doing the same  sort of thing in other cases. So I think we record something in the Tarski biography about Coturella saying that in his thesis,  Monague kept saying, you know, you have to rewrite this, you have to rewrite that.  And that's not intimidation, but that's the same sort of fascistic domination that, as I say, I don't know how much to ascribe to personality, native  personality or how much to ascribe to that's something you learn to do and enjoy doing.  So I don't really have much more to say about that.  It's partly speculation.  No, no, but this is really insightful because, well, first of all, the fact that, I don't  know, that was coming, it reminded you so clearly of Tarski's pattern  and Tarski's behavior.  And that's definitely, I mean,  we know that Tarski was a major influence  for Montague at many, many level.  And second, because it also gives me an insight  about what kind of mechanism could be behind this behavior.  You said, you know, maybe it was something  that he already had, but if he already had,  where does it come from?  And I wonder if, at least in the case of Montagueague I don't know in the case of Tarski but in the  case of Montague you can also imagine that as a defensive mechanism so I am I what's the best way  to protect for some people the best way to protect themselves is to attack and so you have like this  is the recipe this is the right, don't even try to go,  you know, I have the right recipe which makes me strong. And if you do not have, if you do not  agree with the right recipe, I need to destroy you before you destroy me. So in the...  But why destroy the person? I mean,  It just seems to me human if you see somebody struggling at the board. You want to help them but you don't want to totally stop them and say, no, no, no, which is what Tarski  did.  Why do you think Tarski would do that?  Why?  Do you have any sense?  I don't know.  Do you think he got pleasure out of it?  I don't know.  I don't know.  There was just the right way to do things and there was...  If it wasn't the right way, then it was the wrong way.  It was that clear cut.  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  So, it sounds like for Tarski, it was a way to, on the one hand, I mean, Tarski was fighting  a battle.  I mean, like, it was, it sounds like in many of these, in many, maybe everything he was doing,  it was like, how do I fight my battle  in order to get as much power, as much space, as much?  Well, that was a separate thing.  Well, but I mean, can you imagine  overgeneralizing that behavior?  Like, it means that if, in order for me to win this battle,  I need to show that I'm always on top,  I'm always to show that I'm always on the right side.  And so what's the, and then you can imagine,  overgeneralize it, like, you know, this is the right,  this is the wrong, this is the way to do it,  this is not the way to do it.  And maybe you would do that in a kind of more diplomatic way  with colleagues, and then it would reproduce  the very same mechanism and be in a less diplomatic way  with students.  As a way to show that there is a right way to do things.  But sometimes there are also things  that maybe just like percolate,  like in a kind of unconscious way.  That's the pattern that you learn,  and then you spread that pattern in various situations.  Okay, so in academic politics,  in departmental discussions, etc., etc., there are very few  people who say, this is what it has to be and nothing else.  But there are those people, and Tarski was one of those people.  And Montague was one of those people, and Tarski was one of those people. And Montague was one of those people.  Yeah, and Montague was also, it seems, became one of those people.  And I guess whatever happened between Montague and Kalish revolved around Montague not accepting that Kalish wouldn't accept that.  But the person who does that has to have the confidence that when they do that, people will follow along, will accept, okay, you know, we don't  have to argue because it's not that big a deal. You want that? Okay, you can have that.  You want it this way? Okay, you can have it this way. But it doesn't always happen. And part of it is what Tarski had,  and I don't think Montague had, was this kind of magnetic personality, I think, came off, from what I understand, this is all second-hand or third-hand,  as a kind of what we call a martinet.  It's a word to look up.  Yeah, yeah, what's a martinet?  I don't know if I can define it, but…  Okay, continue with the description, maybe.

default: 0:10:24-0:10:26
 Yeah, yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:10:28-0:17:03
 And I don't think he ever had the magnetic personality that Tarski had,  and the charisma that Tarski had.  Which is not to say that he didn't have  other attractive features that would get people to say, oh yes, this is something to agree with,  or to go along with, or to cooperate with.  So Tarski was an unusual mixture of somebody who was  So Tarski was an unusual mixture of somebody who was impossible but also charismatic and managed to.  So it's a Napoleonic kind of figure, which I think Mondigut tried to imitate, if I understand,  but didn't achieve.  On the other hand, I could see where Montague attracted students because they saw that he  had many, many good ideas and was alive. He was pushing all sorts of ideas and he needed good students, he needed  collaborators, he could encourage those who would do that. And if it's a certain period  that, and if it's a certain period in the development of a research program where you have those kinds of students, and where somebody who really has ideas of lines of development of things to do,  can be very influential.  The students will take it up and they will go along  with that kind of personality.  And maybe even that kind of personality  is very important for getting them to go along.  personality is very important for getting them to go along. So all of this, you have to take it because it's on the record.  It's totally off the top of my head, after having had three glasses or more of wine.  That's the best.  That's when the truth comes out. No, but you are depicting a very, very reasonable and picture that fits  with lots of details that I've collected. You're right about, I mean, at least talking  to the people that became his students that are still alive that I can talk to, there  was a sense, like a fascination towards the intellectual gifts that this man had and  also clarity. Everybody says he was an extremely clear. He was. I mean like you had to be, you know,  usually the people divided into groups, I could not understand what he was saying. These were  people that did not have the background or the interest or the capacity, but those that were  able to follow him, they all recognized the  amazing capacity, clarity.  He was essential, he was clear, that's what you need to know.  And even people that can compare him with other people in the department, it really  sounds like he was really one of the top figure in the department in terms of these kind of  skills.  Like for example, when I talk to people describing, at least as a lecturer, church, I said church was boring.  You know, like you would write everything slowly with different colors on the blackboard,  and you know, while Montague would be dense.  Yes.  You know, this is what it is, and then sometimes it would come out with this like either comments  or remarks or observation that would be very sharp, very to the point, sometimes even funny. So I have some anecdotes, for example, from the TAs that were like...  Who?  Two, at least two graduate students who were his TAs and they then they took also his classes.  One is called, his name is Barroso, I think, Barroso, I think that's how you pronounce it.  I interviewed him in Leeds.  Say again.  B-A-R-R-O-Z-O.  Barroso. Never heard of him. I think he took classes with Montague, but then he decided to  move towards a different field. So, he was his DA, and he remembers Montague was supposed to teach,  the class was epistemology, okay? That's the upper division class in epistemology. So,  first day of class, and he says, look, epistemology is the study of  knowledge. Knowledge, we know very little about knowledge. Knowledge, you know, human knowledge  is very uncertain. What's the piece of knowledge we know a little bit more about? Mathematics.  This is going to be a class about mathematics. And then from that moment on, he started doing  the class that he wanted to do. So, after 40 years, people still remember these things.  So, after 40 years people still remember these things. And that's just an example of like, here it is, there is somebody who is able to reframe  things in a way like, oh, wow.  And then he does what he wants.  So I think this was something that was affecting some students.  Like they thought, wow, that's fascinating.  And I mean, you have to have a certain kind of mind, but if you have that kind of mind,  you would find this personality fascinating.  And then it sounds like once you were able to follow him and he recognized that you have  those kind of intellectual qualities and background to understand, he could be very generous with  students, you know, first of all caring.  I have all these people that told me I was intimidated.  I'm going to talk to him at office hours because I thought that, again, I thought he would make me feel like an idiot.  Then I went there, it was very nice,  very patient, he gave me suggestion,  he said to come back,  and in fact, I was shocked,  which is interesting because this is  the very same person who's following the class,  we get a certain image or like the TAs,  they were TAing for a large class,  the introduction to logic, that was  in his textbook, and they really thought that there's a mistake in the textbook.  But do you think he realized that he didn't want to put off people too much and then he  should encourage them after all?  Maybe.  The impression that I have, again, as you said, it's just an intuition. So that I'm never gonna have clear facts about it. Is that  for Montague there was  The first approach especially in the academic world would be an approach in which  Like who are you? I don't know you so listen to me and let me be  in control of the situation

SPEAKER_00: 0:17:03-0:17:05
 I'm maybe in control of the situation.

SPEAKER_01: 0:17:08-0:20:23
 Once he would get to know you and he would like you, then you would see more human dimensions.  Like, you know, he would take students out to dinner,  for example.  Often he would have seminars towards the end of the day,  4.30 to 6 p.m., and then he would take students,  or some of the students, depending, to dinner.  Or maybe different students in different moments,  he would drive them, they would drive with his Bentley,  they would go to these restaurants and so on.  And he would pay for it.  Oh really?  Yeah, that's what like...  Harry Deutsch and the woman at that time  was his wife Linda Deutsch,  who was also Montague's secretary.  They would go out, they would take him to dinner.  Jeff Pelletier told me that he had an experience  that he had.  So, like, I mean, even putting aside Hans Kamp,  who was clearly very, very close  and was a very personal relationship,  even with others, he had this, like, you know,  once you would break that barrier,  then it would become approachable.  He would like you.  Like, he would really enjoy that kind of sharing.  But that's very nice to hear.  And so. I wonder if it was like a way to hear.  I wonder if it was like a way to filter. So it was this way of filtering, like,  unless we get close personally,  then you listen to me,  this is the way to do things, this is the recipe.  When I get to know you, and I like you,  then we talk about different dimensions.  We get closer to to almost a friendship.  Or emotions can come out.  And so generosity, I can make jokes,  I can, we can have moments that are not professional moments  although I never heard that he made any kind of step  or move towards anybody.  It was not that goal.  The goal was really like, he would enjoy your company.  I mean, I think Montague was a social person.  He was.  Yeah, he was not a loner, like,  I wanna be by myself, don't disturb me.  But there was, I think, his filter,  like, for most people, you don't want to deal with them.  He didn't like them, he didn't want to deal with them,  he found them annoying or a waste of time.  But for the people that he liked,  he was very much available.  And not just because of his career,  I mean, some of the students  were not students that necessarily would develop his research program. Yeah, yeah.  Okay, well you know more than I do. No, no, no, but this was triggered by what you told me. Like I mean what you said was very insightful. I never thought about first of all the  the close similarity. I don't know that Tars task was very similar in this regard yeah and and also this thinking about does it come from Tarski or is it something that was inside  Montague and Tarski just activated like oh right here it is I like it I like it I should do it  like that you know something in this sense of like dominating the enemy like the other is the enemy  and what you had to do you you had to say, no,  that's wrong, this is right, follow my recipe, no space, no pity.  Because Tarski too was a very social person.  It was.  It's not that he hated human beings, but human beings had to behave in a certain way, I guess,  for him to like them.  Yeah.  Yeah.

default: 0:20:23-0:20:24
 Well, thank you very much, Saul.

SPEAKER_01: 0:20:24-0:20:31
 But I don't want to bother you too much  because it's getting hot and I want to do some cleaning first.

