HK: 0:00:00-0:05:10
...the parents when they're much younger and you can actually see now what you are  just telling me. I mean they both look actually quite... I mean very different  from what I remember because I think I told you I... 

IC:
Well you encountered them  when the father was already on his decline.

HK:
When I came along with Richard a couple of times because I had this joint apartment complex  that the parents were running...

IC:
In the San Fernando Valley right down in his house.  So you did actually see those?  (Yeah, yeah, yeah.)  I don't know that.  So you were able, you saw them?  (Yeah, I talked a little bit, but it was only twice I think.)  In that place?  So you even saw the place?  (Yeah, yeah, yeah.)  Because the place still exists.  I drove there, it still exists.

HK:
I can't remember.  We had been working together.  We were still going to a Richard just (incomprehnsible).  He said "I have to go and see my parents".  And so they looked already, especially Monty, they looked sort of old and not quite, I mean not really senile, but very, very different  from the way they come across in that photograph.

What you said makes sense of the photograph and the photograph sort of supports what you were saying, that she was quite a remarkable  person.  And he looks very attractive in that picture.  So one can see that she would have fallen for him, although he didn't have all that  much by way of position or actually guts to bring them on. Well, I mean, like, if you...  One thing to keep in mind is that  I think she was really  looking for some kind of independence, in the sense  that she did not need money, because she  had... I mean, she was not wealthy  in the sense that then the property was  divided among the sisters, but the mother  gave her some money that was  probably the money that they started.  From what you're saying, she had status.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And that's what, you know, she had a sense of herself, like, because at the beginning  when they first moved to Stockholm for the first job, so right before Monta… it was  1927, so Montague was born three years later, they were living in a very modest house.  It's called, I think it's called duplex. They were living in a very modest house.  I think it's called duplex.  So Monti's parents, they were…  That brought them with them or so?  Well, actually Monti's parents are the ones that moved to California when Monti was young.  Monti was born in Vermont, but then very little they moved to California.  And so Monti grew up in California, went to school in California, very close to Santa  Barbara, and then in the outskirt of Santa Barbara, and then he started working right  there.  And then he went into the marine for one or two years in the Bay Area.  So Monti essentially is Californian, but his family, the parents were the ones that moved from Vermont, probably looking for a better situation.  They were poor peasants in Vermont.  I mean, it was like typical little land.  And I could see from the census all these children.  And so they had to move to find.  So, and probably, I guess, by working and like that's how they, you know,  start working in the phone company,  the new town where Lorraine was living  needed this kind of work and, you know,  probably that's how they met.  But on the other end, remember there was this issue  that they knew each other, they met young.  I mean, Lorraine must have been 19.  He was four years older than her.  So he was 23 and they got married almost right away.  When Richard was born, Lorraine was 36.  His father was 40.  And I know for sure that Lorraine is  the Mont-Richard biological mother because I had the birth certificate.  She went to a hospital to give birth, which was unusual. It was for fancy, you know.  Again, since they were living in this very modest duplex, the money was not  coming from them. The money was coming from Lorraine's mother, for sure. They paid  for the hospital, they paid, you know, this is the grandchild that is born after  many, many years.  And I think I told you the story,  like that was always something suspicious to me that I was trying to understand.  And it was only later that I was able to put the pieces together  because of some of the material that I found in that box of lost documents  where there was these letters from this guy that was talking to Montague,  like, oh, Richard,  it has already been one year that you left us.  You have moved.  You found a job at UCLA.  So we're talking about 1956.  It was already one year that you left us.  We miss you so much.  Yesterday was my birthday.  Lorraine was very nice.  She came here.  So Lorraine was in Stockton.  This guy was living in San Francisco.  Lorraine.  Oh, sorry, sorry.  Lorraine at that point was Oakland because that's where Richard was at birth.  So Lorraine came over,  we spent the day together,  it was really, really nice,

default: 0:05:11-0:05:12
 she cooked for me.

HK: 0:05:13-0:36:48
 Letter from Lorraine,  Richard, remember,  it's,  I'm trying to remember,  maybe it was Bob,  his name was Bob too,  this is Bob's birthday,  please remember to,  you know,  send him a card,  he's always so nice with you, you know that he really likes that so this kind of  And then I reconstruct Bob and Monty met when they were doing the marine service together  That's how they met and they remain friends and the cousin  Montague's cousin a few years older that was able to interview a few years ago in Santa Cruz  She told me yes, I remember they were  coming to visit the farm.  She was growing up with her parents in the farm.  And the friend was always together.  Like, he was cooking for them  when we returned the visit.  So he was cooking for all of us.  He would come with them to visit us.  And I remember that, you know, I was a teenager.  Monty was 10, she was 14.  And, you know, Lorraine was talking to  my mom and saying what a wonderful guy he was and so on.  I thought, it's a little bit strange that a married woman…  It's a real menage a trois.  Yeah, I think they were all very well aware of what was going on and Lorraine, of course,  was the one that was controlling that.  To me, this was particularly telling.  I don't care about the gossiping  part. What I care is it shows that Richard really grew up in an environment which the  outside of Stockton was Stockton, was this kind of very conservative place, but within  his family, there were dynamics because of the mother. they were not the standard one, not the usual one. There  was more openness, more flexibility. They may also explain some of these way of endorsing,  envisioning the world around him and himself with respect to that. Definitely, there's  very strong connection between mother and son in these letters that they were writing to each other.  I mean, I only got the Lorraine's letter because that's the one that Richard received, where she talks about everything.  She talks about how nice Bob, like this is Bob Richard's partner.  He is because Richard has won a scholarship in New Mexico.  So that summer he was in New Mexico for the scholarship in this kind of seminar.  I didn't know about that. Yeah, so this was right before… Actually, this was probably right before… It was summer  1962 and then I think in fall 1962 is when Richard came on sabbatical.  Yeah, yeah. I never knew about this, this Mexican stuff.  So it was this… And I'm trying to remember, he also produced a paper out of it.  I think maybe this is on the notion of determinism in physics.  That's where the paper came from.  Ah, I see.  Yeah.  So it was one of these grants that the military used to give in those years.  Yeah.  Where you put together people with very different backgrounds.  They were mathematicians, they were logicians, but they were also economists.  And this was in Mexico City or…?  No, no, no.  It was Albuquerque.  Oh, in New Mexico.  Sorry, sorry.  I didn't say New Mexico, Albuquerque.  It was Albuquerque.  So in Albuquerque, he spent like six, seven weeks there or a couple of months because  the fellowship required them to be together at this institute.  They would pay for everything.  They were supposed to…  I was able to find actually a couple of guys that were there  one of them was actually the one that was the editor of the volume so I  They were willing to share their memories about like the idea would be that we would brainstorm  But actually we really had very little in common and in some big memory of Monti somebody would be on his own  But so he spent those two months in there and Lorraine and Monty came to LA to fix things  at the house.  This was not the one that you saw, but the previous one, the one on Beverly Glen, where  Bob then remained until he died in 2012.  And so they spent a week with him.  Monty was fixing things in the house and Lorraine was taking care of the kitchen, cooking together  with Bob.  And she writes to Richard, Bob is such nice, we have a very nice time, Monty is doing this,  I'm cooking with Bob.  Bob is such a nice guy, you should be really nicer with your friend.  Like in that letter, it's really like, you see this kind of dynamic in the family that  really opens a different window.  Anyway, sorry for this, I could go on for hours.  Please take your time. I have a couple of things.  So, thanks for these questions, that you could think about a little bit.  And Hans, if you don't mind, would you mind starting about the part about you?  Yeah. Let me tell you why I asked you those questions.  It's because I'm thinking about how to present.  Like, I thought that it would be more useful rather than, you know, saying, okay, this is what happens in 64.  This is what happened in 65.  I want to create a list for people for which I have enough material.  I want to create profiles.  So in other words, when you enter the story,  it's not because, okay, 1965 Hans arrives.  And then 1960, no.  So when I introduce you,  you become part of the story.  And of course, your story is a story related to Richard.  And it's important for me to get a sense of like,  from a certain point of view,  looking at the profile of the students that work with Richard,  yours, and I'm not giving an evaluation,  but yours is the more peculiar.  You were in Europe.  You were already working in a kind of intellectually stimulating group.  And you made a huge change.  Also you met Richard like three years before that change.  So there is a story there and I think it will be interesting, if you're willing to share,  to understand because I think that may say something about Richard.  So why, of course, something about you too, of course, but why?  What happened in 1962?  How did you interact?  What impression did you have? Why did you decide then to continue working with him?  It is an unusual story, not particularly exciting, but one would not think of it if one hadn't  been told it. First, that might be of some use.  It's coming out, I think, next year,  but it's already online somewhere.  I was asked to do, I don't know if you've ever heard of this,  the annual review of linguistics. Sure, sure, yes.  So they invite, it's all on invitation,  and they occasionally invite people for a little autobiography.  invite people to for a little autobiography. I did that and it was hard work. It was sort of fun too but it was hard work mostly because it had to be  fairly short. So it was 8,500 words and most of the time I spent shortening what  had already written. And so in the actual thing,  I will send that to you also if you want to.  Sure, definitely.  There is actually very little about my own history, but an earlier version which  I have here has a little bit on, it's only a page and a half half on how I came to go to Amsterdam.  I'll tell you more, but I can give you a few more.  Oh, definitely.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  I was about to ask you when you said I had to shorten it.  I hope you kept the longer version.  Yeah, there is even more material somewhere, but that's probably not relevant anyway.  So this tells a little bit about the story what would make me go to this new institute  at Better Just Third Ground, founded in Amsterdam. And, and yeah, so perhaps I should start with  that.  Yeah, I think that would be a great way to start. Start with that and then we can go on to how I ended up in UCLA.  So I was born on an island to the north of Holland, in one of these string of islands  along the Dutch and then German coasts and sort of going up along the Danish coast a  little bit. And as very  early on, I was born in the, in during the Second World War and so at that point  Holland was already under German occupation and my father was mayor of  that island at the time and didn't want to continue that because he had to  collaborate with the Germans and so he quit that job and took a job that didn't  require that kind of connivence with the occupying forces and that was an an administrative job, he was a jurist by training, which was being director or president  of a corporation, state-run corporation, that had for its task to the upkeep of dikes and roads in this part of that part of the Netherlands.  There's in particular one dike, it's sort of a break in the dunes,  like that hole goes all the way from the top of J to Biarritz basically or certainly up to Normandy.  It's mostly protected by dunes and this particular point's a little, about 10  kilometres north of the place where I grew up. There is a big gap and so until the  late Middle Ages it was actually, the area of pretty much a mess of inlets  from the sea and lakes and marshes and so forth.  And they started reclaim already quite early on, but that meant building a dive to close  that gap and that was one of the main defences against the sea. So that was the main project or the main task of this corporation.  But then there were lots of other dikes that were providing second protection and roads on them.  So that's the job he got and that's why we moved to the place where I grew up.  I see, I see.  So we moved already in 1942, but then during the later parts of the war,  we were moved to another...  So this is the village where I grew up.  It's between the town where this office was of my father and the sea, basically.  of my father and the sea basically. And we were moved away from there, evacuated during, I can't remember, I think, 43 to 45, because it was all part of the German Defence Line.  So we went to a place on the other side of the town. My earliest memories are of that place. And then in the summer of 45 we moved back to this village called Bergen.  And so that's actually where I grew up from. I was four.  And you went to school there?  I went to school, yeah, in that village. there was an anthroposophic Steiner school that was just been set up.  I was the sixth student of that school.  They just opened it?  They just opened it?  Well, the year before, I think, or half a year before.  Anyway, so it was very small to start with, but it's now actually very well established, and not  only has it a primary school, but also a sort of, what do you call it?  A middle or high school.  A middle or high school.  Yeah, there's no middle in Holland.  You don't have the distinction.  Oh, yeah, you're only trying to do your high school.  No, just high school.  It all seems to be quite flourishing. But yeah so I went  there and then that was only a primary school and then went to a sort of  classical gymnasium in this nearby town where my father also had his  office. And so then at the end of that I quit university and I wanted to become a  theoretical physicist. So I went to…  Okay, so before going to the university you already had this interest in this design.  Yeah, so I for a long time didn't quite know what I was doing. Actually I did sort  of… there was a scientific branch and also a humanist branch. And they made it possible for me to get an Abitur in both of these.  But then by the time that I was going to leave high school,  it was already clear to me I wanted to do physics.  And so I went to the university where my father had also been,  was Leiden, not a bad choice.  And I did sort of the preparatory work,  I sort of did a bachelor's degree in physics and mathematics.  And while I was there, I met somebody who was also there,  he did mathematics and physics,  and there's not much of a difference.  He was one year ahead of me, he's a man by the name of Dick de Jong.  I don't know if you've come across him.  He was really a mathematical magician, he became that.  And did a PhD under Kleene in Wisconsin, in medicine.  Then came back to Amsterdam and eventually got a professorship for the last few years.  He's still around.  I remember a couple of years I took…  Oh, that young man.  Yeah.  Okay, okay.  I see his name.  As I said, I know him as a logician, a mathematical engineer of that school.  So we became already very good friends in Leiden and he knew about this Institute of  Bertz.  And in fact his father who was, I think he was a doctor and I think was for a while also  Bertz, general physician.  So his father and Betts knew each other quite well,  and Dick knew about this whole thing via his father,  and had already, much earlier than I, decided that's where I wanted to continue.  And he told me about it, and I thought I'd seen these people in light and disappear in  the Institute of Theoretical Physics and never came out so to speak.  And I thought, okay, maybe I should give myself a chance to do something else before I devote  myself completely to this thing.  So I went along with him, so we went together in 1961 it was, from Leiden to Amsterdam.  And we did pretty much everything together, we followed the same courses.  So in that sense you formally transfer then?  So in other words, you went from the University of Leiden to the University of Amsterdam as  a transfer student?  No, it wasn't like that.  Oh, you were supposed to go there formally.  So this degree that I got in Leiden is something that is actually complete in itself.  And then you can transfer it to other institutions?  You can take it anywhere you like.  Okay, I see. Was that degree that you got in Leiden a prerequisite for you to join the Institute in Amsterdam?  No, I don't think so. I mean, I think it never came up.  I mean, I couldn't have become a graduate student there without having such a...  I see. I see. Okay. ...cadet d'arts, as it's called in Dutch. I see.. Okay. It was the title that you needed.  I see.  But whether the actual subject mattered or not, I'm not sure.  I mean, having had mathematics written was helpful, but strictly speaking, an institute  was part of the philosophy faculty, so I can't imagine that they could have imposed such  a requirement even if it was very sensible.  So, you remember the impression that you had of like, I guess the environment was… the  kind of experience that you were having was significantly different from the one in Leiden.  Yeah.  Because you join a group where there is a leading figure that has a certain kind of  interest.  Yeah.  I mean education at European universities,  I don't know what you experienced when you were much younger then.  But in those days, it was actually very badly organized.  And so, there were massive courses and it was all very anonymous.  And you got occasionally a little bit of a contact with the assistants of the professors who  did the exercise sessions.  But that was about it.  And then you saw the professor only when you went for doing this sort of oral exam.  Yeah, yeah.  Familiar, right?  Oh yeah, very familiar.  I mean the whole thing was really… And office hours, like you know, the famous…  I mean, you would stop by and see if by any chance the professor was in the office and  was willing to talk to you.  It was not like regular office hours.  Yeah, I actually never went into any of these.  It was sort of understood what the stuff was that you had to know and I did go to the lectures, so I  had a pretty good idea of what the subject was about.  How large was that group?  It was totally different.  I mean, the Institute, it was a bit like my primary school, where Dick and I were pretty  much the only students.  I think we were the only students in that year.  Okay, so the interaction that you are talking about was the interaction that you had in  Leiden, where you had a personal interaction.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I was about to say, I thought there was a personal interaction in the Institute.  Okay, okay.  Now I remember.  I was a little bit surprised, like really?  I thought there was kind of…  You had a personal interaction with Beth.  That's totally different.  And so, yeah, these lectures.  So to be a graduate student, like it's still in the US,  you have to do a certain number of coursework and actually there too,  you have to pass exams over the material covered in  those courses.  And basically that was all that was required.  So the degree that you ended up with was something called doctoral and it corresponds, it was  more stuff, but it corresponds more to a masters than to a PhD. You did have to  write a thesis but I mean my thesis was just sort of reconstructing all the  proofs in a famous paper by Tarski called the Theory of Reductive Systems.  So I mean there was a little, I mean I learned a lot from it and it was not true because  the paper has no proof anyway and some of them are not very deep but still I mean it  took some thinking to see how some of these procedures go but that was basically it and  I think I may have made some general comments on what the point of this  might be, but there's very little of that. So it's not really a PhD, so it's a PhD  template.  So which courses, what kind of courses did you take?  Well so the subject itself was called philosophy but it was really in this institute of mathematical  logic and foundations of science. That involved a course course on basically, I mean, I knew no logic at that point.  Yeah, that was your introduction to logic.  Proposition of a particular logic.  And we did that by this book called, entitled Four Methods by Bett, which is basically his, I had written about it before, but it  is at the same time a textbook, and his first really smooth presentation of the semantic  tableau technique.  Ah.  And that, I'm still very, very grateful that I was trained in logic that way,  because semantic tableaus has this extraordinary quality that it is on  the one hand, yeah, a method of proof.  And at the same time, it sort of, yeah, it is based on the idea that when you want  to prove something, you want to try and construct  a counter example and if the system is such that your construction method  doesn't succeed then that means that yeah the conclusion does follow from the  premises and in the other case if it  doesn't then and then you will in the end get it get it count them all so that  that marriage of semantics and probe theory I think makes it actually very  special if you look at all these other kinds of systems that we have for first-order logic.  Okay, and so that was, then there was a course, I'm trying to think, there was a course by Beth that I sort of,  the history of logic that I set in with.  The two things that I mentioned so far were actually things that one had to pass  an exam on.  I also had to do one course with a man, he would have been quite famous in Holland, by  the name of Alderwelt, who was meaning literally old world, and it just fitted completely.  So he was a more traditional philosopher and I I did an exam with him on Bergson,  Materia Memoria, and a book by, yes,  philosopher Zimmer, a German philosopher from the beginning of the 20th century,  which I didn't like at all.  I didn't like Materia Memoria didn't like much very much also.  I got a very good mark for this exam.  Never was anything so unjustified.  And what else?  What other causes did I have for an exam?  There was, yeah, I can't remember exactly,  but still was part by way of an exam with a sentiment.  But we did a lot of sort of project research.  I was better at a project that was financed from Euratom that was at the time this thing of the  of the six of the European community I think. Was it called at this time?  Yeah you know what I mean. France, Germany, Italy, and the Dabrino Lux.  Anyway, so they had… this was part… so Erato was this attempt at the time to develop  nuclear energy.  Was it called like… I think they were using… weren't they using the word community?  No, no, that was something…  There was something called the European Society of Coal and Steel.  Oh, okay. Way back.  So that's the predecessor.  Because it was a  series of arrangements  and agreements for exchanges  more on the economic side.  Exactly. And so one big  concentration that already saw that was  the question of how to provide  for the kind of energy  by which time the coal would run out.  And so nuclear power was already a big issue.  And so they had set up…  I don't know if you have…  Have you ever been to Ispra?  Yeah, yeah.  So that's…  That's when they created the centre in Ispra, which is still there.  Yeah, yeah is still there.  I know, I have not been back since those days.  So you guys were directly involved in this project then?  Not only were you taking courses, but then you became some sort of assistant?  Well, so the story is considered. They built this experimental reactor there and they had bought the most  powerful computer of the day as an IBM 1790, no it was 37, I can't remember the exact specification, but it was the largest there was and it was  very, very, very expensive.  And it wasn't really true in those days, perhaps even more than it is now, that every  day such a computer doesn't do anything.  The amortization is so enormous, a tremendous waste of time, and they had counted on this  reactor becoming critical at a certain time.  And there was a power station here in Stuttgart.  So this computer was sitting there doing nothing, and so the people in charge wondered how they  could give it things to do.  And one thing, and I don't know exactly how this deal was made, was that they got in touch  with Bett or vice versa so that Bett would provide this computer with tasks in proof theory.  Just because otherwise it would have been so unhappy.  So there were a number of such projects. This was one of them.  And it was very shortly after I got Lamsden in this first year,  I got a kind of assistantship paid for from  this project.  So this was a big advantage for Bert.  So for him it was in a sense a safety because he would be provided with money that he could  use to support…  I had two collaborators, a bit-arbeiter, whatever you call it,  paid for by the university for his job,  and they did most of the teaching,  maybe even three, but they had a lot more people,  I think four or five,  and Dick was also paid from this,  who all got paid from this project.  And it was great because it just made it go up I was  really part of something for the first time in my life and got on with the people very well.  Which meant, Anstead, you and Dick, you had to be physically in ISPRA.  Well we went there I think, I don't know if it was more than one time, but we did go  there one time to present our stuff and to see what it was like and to see what was coming  out of this computer also.  One shouldn't forget these things that that was long before the Internet.  Yeah, yeah, sure.  Believe me, I know that very well.  I grew up without Internet, so I know what you're talking about.  Anyway, so…  And Hans, roughly as far as time is concerned, so we are 1960.  So, Dick and I went to Amsterdam in the fall of 1961.  Okay, okay. in the fall of 61. And this was in the course, I think, of that first academic year, so 61, 62, it must have  been somewhere in the spring.  Anyway, so…  And the program was a two-year program?  You couldn't put…  The master?  The academic?  Yeah, the academic.  So it was open and flexible.  Yeah, you could take pretty much as long as you wanted in those days.  And so Dick took three and I took four.  So we had to re-evaluate again.  And so that was really sort of hazy exactly.  After about 23 exams I just mentioned,  were there any other exams they had to do towards this degree,  as far as the main part was concerned.  But actually the more demanding parts were, he had an auxiliary, I think he did too,  had auxiliary subjects, mathematics and physics,  and had to pass the exams for the main courses they were offering there.  So that was actually quite challenging.  It was a course on differential equations  that even the full-time mathematicians would fail in enormous numbers.  Who was teaching that course?  So you guys were taking that in the mathematics department?  Yeah.  Okay, okay. It was not offered in? Yeah. Ah, okay, okay.  It was not offered in the institute.  No, no, no.  It was part of the curriculum that you had to go to a different, like…  Yeah, I can't even remember now.  Yeah, I guess I'll see the man in front of you.  The name will come to me, if I need to, but they taught that course.  I just want you…  Oh, yeah, this is…  Oh, I can take a break.  I'm sorry.  Okay.

