SPEAKER_00: 0:00:00-1:39:45
 So, I was...  Yeah, we have enough light.  Oh yeah, plenty, plenty. I was reading the paragraph where you talk about how you decided  to study at UCLA, in the US to begin with, with the application of the Institute of International  Education that you don't go through. Maybe one thing that would help is if we go back to 1962, you had one year at the Institute  and then you were already working with that for like an assistant, let's call it like  that.  Then he invites, that's my understanding, he invites Montague to spend some time there.  I don't know exactly which way it went, but they knew of each other via Tarski. Tarski  and Bette knew each other quite well and corresponded quite a bit. I think Bette may also have visited  Tarski once in Berkeley, but I'm not quite sure about that.  So it was Montague's sabbatical.  He decided, probably partly because of this connection that he knew about,  and Amsterdam had a certain reputation about logic,  for logic also because of intuitionism.  about logic, for logic also because of intuitionism.  And Heiting was there.  Heiting was the primary colleague of that there.  So Montague decided to divide his sabbatical between Amsterdam and Warsaw.  He wanted to visit Mostowski there in particular.  And he did it in the way, I remember that he first came  for a while, a month and a half perhaps, I don't remember the details, to Amsterdam  and then from there went to Warsaw and then came back again for another couple of months maybe. So he presented stuff to this  little group around Baird and we were already in awe of him before he came and  that was very much corroborated by the things he told us. It was the time that  he was working together with Kaplan in part  on this stuff about the Hengman Paradox and this longer paper that Montague published  on his own about diagonalization and the generalization of the truth paradox. And he was also working on mathematical properties of higher order  logic that I remember him saying some things about it. So I was very, just very impressed and I also learned from conversation, I don't know if it was just with me, but  I'd heard that he had this extraordinary musical ability and that one of his interests  in coming to Holland was also that he hoped to be able to play some of these outstanding organs.  And as luck had it, the, what do you call them in English?  The concierge of the office of my father was a couple and she, the brother of the woman was the verger of the large  church in Alkmaar which has a very famous organ. And so I was able to, I must have already felt confident to say if you're interested I could organize  that.  And you arranged? this organ, it's a very large, gothic church which was re… what's the word?  Renovated?  No.  Revealed?  No.  So it was like all these churches, of course Catholic and that was turned to a Protestant  church.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  It was not reconverted like… yeah, yeah, there's a term.  We got it.  So it gets taken over by a different faith.  Yeah, there's a word for that, exactly.  Yeah, I know, I know.  Okay, and anyway, so actually this is a particularly good example of how different  these churches become when they  are taken over by Protestant, especially Dutch Protestantism, which is basically Calvinism.  So the official Dutch Reformed church is a branch of Calvinism.  So they were stripped of everything, and also the windows are just plain glass.  And in a way it makes a very Barry impression, but it's  very different and also very beautiful in its own right. It's this huge, very light  space. Anyway, so he came to Berlin and he stayed with us and we went to Altmaier and  played the old man and had great fun. And so that actually created some kind of personal  relation. And so that was in 60s, it must have been the summer of 60s or the spring  of 63, I think it was. Yeah, it must have been because 61 was when I came to Amsterdam and I think the year that  he was there was the spring of 1960.  Was fall 1962 for sure?  I don't know if you had it longer than that.  So for sure Montague was in Amsterdam in fall 1962.  I don't know if it was also for the next semester.  No, it was not. I didn't remember that it was the fall rather than the spring.  At least according to the records. I was able to, you know, I got these work records.  I'm sure you're right. Okay, so, Bert died in the spring of 63.  Was it 63 or 64, Hans? I am trying to remember because I am…  I think it may be 1964. It could be 1964.  Let's see.  I have one more year after that.  That's what's happening, 1964, 1965.  Yeah, I think you're right.  I think it was…  Well, I mean this is very…  I have it on my slides, but I have it on my computer.  You're like…  Is it possible that he was born in 1901 and then he died in 1964?  No, I don't think he was beyond 60, I think he was in the early 50s.  I know there is a Wikipedia page for sure.  There we are.  He was born in 1908 and he died on the 12th of April in 1964.  If I remember correctly from what I was reading about him, he was something  relatively quick and unexpected.  It was not a long disease.  He had like some problems, but…  Yes and no.  He was already, I'm trying to think when that was, year 62, 63.  He was, I think it was in the spring of that semester, of that year, he was out of action  for a long time. Oh, I see. And then he came back again in the fall of 1963.  And then I can't remember how long he was out of action again in the spring of 64 but at that point  I think he had angina pectoresis or something.  So I remember we were not really surprised at all when he died. He was not really working anymore at the point when he did.  So which meant at that point for you, staying in Amsterdam was not even an option.  In the case of Dick, it was of very well planned so Bert actually made sure that he went to the  right university in the US.  Dick was working on the method of mathematics of intuitionism and so going to work with  Kleene and all the various things having to doing with recursion was a very natural choice.  And in my case, so I mean Dick was his student during that period because he already knew  that. So I think that had a reasonably good opinion of me and I mean otherwise I probably  wouldn't have taken me on board quite so soon. Definitely not.  And I went to his place a couple of times.  But at one point I had to choose for special supervision.  And I could have chosen him but I didn't because my interests were in  moral theory at that point. There was one of the three senior assistants or people who had a position of a professorial position in this new institute.  There was a Dutch priest by the name of Carl de Beauvoir.  Oh, yeah.  Okay, okay.  Because Montague was in touch with him later on in his sabbatical in 1966.  Because you know Montague goes back to France when you were already to see the way.  Oh, that's where he was because I only saw matters of the point of time.  Yeah, yeah.  So he had written a dissertation under Betts on the theory of definition sort of related  to Betts' theorem on implicit and explicit-ability. So he did model theory and at that point I thought he would be my natural  choice because that's what he did and what he was interested in. It was probably not I mean, was nowhere near Betts in anything.  And he actually seemed to have believed  that he would be made Betts' successor.  And that didn't happen.  And so in the end, he actually left,  perhaps more than a half, but a bit like that, out of disappointment, and he got a  job at one of these colleges in the east of Los Angeles, Santa Clara.  Oh, that's how it happened.  So he leaves Holland and he goes to Santa Clarita, you mean, something like that.  No, Santa Clara.  Oh, right north of LA.  It's to the east, directly.  Yeah, it's northeast.  To the northeast?  Yeah, Santa Clara is also where C.C. Chang ended up leaving in his retirement community.  Is it the same?  Yeah, so it's like northeast.  Yeah.  Yeah.  It's a cluster of connected...  I don't know how it's now,  but connected colleges,  fairly good sort of.  And he went there, I'd say.  Yeah.  And so Santa Clara College  was a Catholic college.  They may all have been Catholic,  but it's not the only one of that bunch. Anyway, I mean, you can look that up too. So that's where he ended his days.  And he sort of disappeared and I remember at one point asking Saul Pfefferman  whether he knew any. He said yes, he had been in touch with him, but also it must have been in the 80s, not  for quite a while.  So you knew that he would not be the person you could study with, but at the same time  you started getting signs that Bette was not doing great.  By the time I had to make a decision, Bette was already dead.  Okay, so…  I mean, he might have made an effort for me if he had lived longer, but I mean…  But clearly he was not.  And so…  But you did know which places would be appropriate for you because at least in your  story you mentioned Stanford, Berkeley and UCLA, which clearly indicates a certain direction.  Yeah, I had an idea of where things were happening in the area.  So which means that since you had previously interacted with Montague, you could imagine  Montague as a supervisor.  In other words, he had…  Yeah, but I hadn't listed him at my…  I mean, I hadn't listed UCLA as the top of these three, as Berkeley, Stanford, and  UCLA in that order.  Oh, because you don't say…  Okay, sorry, you don't say that they were ranked.  No, sorry.  In other words, to Berkeley, okay, you just list them, which is a diplomatic thing to  do.  Actually you put them in alphabetical order, Berkeley, Stanford and UCLA.  Yeah, but I did rank them in this application via this Institute of International Education.  And I think that it says there they never did anything.  And even not after.  So I had written to Montague because he was the only person I knew.  And I didn't get a reply for quite a long time.  But I eventually did.  And he said I would be most welcome.  And a very nice letter.  But they had not received any information about me.  So that's how you learned that there was some problem because I wonder how do you know  that some process doesn't go through?  Exactly.  I wrote to this institute again and again they didn't do anything.  So when I actually got to California in September, so when I had a chance to talk to people like  Pfefferman and Dosti, they said, no, I've  never got anything.  And so if it hadn't been for this personal contact, I would never have gone.  I don't know what I would have done.  I mean, I could have stayed in Amsterdam even without working with Le Bouvert because the  alternative was Heiting.  But Heiting, I mean but hating was very good.  He was not an easy person to get on with, but also he was intuitionism  and I wasn't into intuitionism.  That wasn't a natural choice.  Anyway, so...  Can I ask you, since you met all these people,  in particular comparing the style in terms of teaching and interacting that Beth had  and Haydn.  Were they similar?  Were they different as teacher, as potential advisors?  Beth was very engaged in his peculiar way of so funny and he was a real character.  Haitian was very shy and retired and the way that then typically develops with people who  become professors and very well regarded in the field. It's a kind of standoffishness  and you never quite know. You are always a little afraid that you might offend them.  Yeah, yeah.  And I mean I could well imagine that things would have worked out in the end. But the  main thing was the subject didn't match.  Yeah, but comparing this to like with Montague, for example, like you, of course, you had  not interacted with Montague, he was not your teacher, he was just a visitor, but you had  interacted with him enough. Could you imagine yourself working with Montague based on what  Before I got there, you mean?  Yeah, yeah. I think so.  I mean there was some kind of personal rapport.  And if there hadn't been, I don't think I would have dared to ask, to write to him  the way I had.  And that his supervision, whether in scarecrows or not, would take the form that it would,  I had no idea. If I'd known in advance I would have done everything to get there.  And of course I also didn't know that I would end up writing a dissertation on something  that really had to do more with  some other person. I mean that was completely in his favor. I still remember him saying  that, I can't remember the occasion, but that he thought it was part of the ethos and the duty of a PhD supervisor not to give a subject, a topic to the student.  One crucial aspect of doing a dissertation was to fight your own theme.  And the supervisor could then be useful in telling you whether this had already been done or  what to look for the stuff if it hadn't been done completely or to evaluate whether  it was too much or too little for a dissertation, but not to make the first move.  I still remember that I thought it was perfectly natural.  And it's only later that I came to see that even that, and at that time, was a real stance  that was not generally received.  Yeah, it was definitely not the default. It also probably was not so necessarily close  to Montague's own experience because I don't think working with Tarski, Tarski did not  have exactly that kind of approach towards his students, at least based on what I've learned about him and from the Feffermann's biography.  If you want to work on something that was not directly relevant for Tarski's agenda…  I don't know how true that is.  I mean, Tarski had a very difficult tradition to his students, and partly a pretty exploitative  one.  There's no question of that.  But as far as coming up with your own theme, so I'm wondering if this work on natural  models of set theory, yeah, maybe that was also something that did fit in Tarski's  general agenda.  Well, enough to suggest, remember like that book that Montague tried to work on  for ten years with Pfeffermann, that it was coming from Tarski's suggestion like, oh,  your results and Pfeffermann's results should be combined together. The suggestion was given  at the end because he signed on their dissertation  in the same year, 1957, because he waited for both of them.  And so, and at least based on what Saul told me, it was Tarski's idea to say,  look guys, put the results together and publish a monograph.  And so they started working on that, I think right away in 1958, 1959, until early  60s. That was the most productive time when Saul himself told me he was committed and  he was trying to work on that. Then they waited too long, they published some of the results  anyway.  Part of it was that Montague thought that Saul was completely wrong about the whole  thing.  Part of it was mistaken actually.  I know far too little and didn't know enough at the time.  In the meantime, the literature had evolved.  We had published some of the results.  To work on some others, we would have had to expand and expand with new things that  happened.  Richard was not willing, he was busy with other things. I was busy with my own things. And so in the end, and in fact, actually  in this sense, yes, so it was Richard that wanted to continue the project. At a certain  point Fefferman, Saul told me, and I found a letter, the letter was sent to the editor  where Saul says, I'm okay, I'm okay with giving everything that  I've done so far, just give it to Montague's hands. He can do whatever he wants, but I'm  not going to be part of this project anymore.  It's a somewhat different story from the one that I got. Montague really said that  there's no future in this cooperation because you just think that the other side was right.  I mean I'm saying this only, I mean you can only quote.  Yeah, I mean keep in mind that I have the version that Saul told me.  When we tell stories we always like, you know, maybe you don't want to be so explicit in  the way it was with Montague.  What he told me is like, well in in the meantime, lots of things have changed.  New ideas should be taken into consideration, and Richard didn't seem to be willing to be engaged in that way.  Maybe he was too busy with other things.  That's probably exactly what Richard told him.  Okay, we don't have to solve that one. So you imagine Montague as someone you could work with. Remember, we start from that point, like based on your interaction with him, the way, what  you saw about him, what you knew about him, it was like the fact that you decided to write  him.  Yeah, certainly. Certainly, and I mean the most extended and systematic cooperation was with Kalish.  And that was really, I mean, Montague was clearly the lead in that, but it was genuine  cooperation there's no question of it, and one paper after another and then eventually  the book.  And that must have somehow worked.  Even if Kalish didn't contribute quite as much to these joint projects, they must have  somehow had a relationship where they could work together.  You look skeptical. No, no, no.  I think that the kind of relationship was...  I mean, you mentioned something earlier,  like the need for Montiel,  at least for some of his work,  would be very useful for him  to have an interlocutor  he could talk to,  he could present ideas to,  not necessarily because he needed  much of a feedback for that,  but it was like a comforting mirror that would activate his brain in a way that he wouldn't  do by himself.  Could be that.  It's Kehlich himself that tells the story.  Of course, you know, I think Kehlich was a good storyteller, so we need to be careful  that it's recorded.  So I do have the audio.  I can hear Kehlich telling the story to Anita Fefferman when she interviewed him for the Tarski's biography and what what Kielisz says look I don't  know much I don't know I don't know much about Tarski because we all interacted a few times  we don't have that close interaction but you know I know I knew much better one of Tarski's students  Monta Richard and so on and so he tells the anecdote about Dana  and Richard still working with Tarski because they were still in Berkeley, but they were  close because Montague met Kalish way before going to UCLA. That's why Kalish wanted to  buy him. Montague brought him there. They met in Berkeley. Also, Keilish's first wife, Veronica, was Montague's  best friend in Berkeley. So there was all this connection. They met earlier, they knew  very well. And so what Keilish says is that there are some weekends Dana and Richard would  drive to LA to spend the weekend with Keilish. And Keilish tells to work and tells Anita how they would work.  So now the typical scenario would be the following. Richard would be playing the piano, Dana and  me would be showering and they would yell at each other like you know proofs or something,  ideas you know and then we would sit and we would start writing. The way he described the situation is clearly, he's very explicit in this case, and also  kind of humble in admitting that he was there almost like a semi-spectator, like somebody  who could follow them.  Kesh.  Kesh.  Somebody who could follow them, maybe would also help them collect the ideas, but those  were the two engines, the producers of ideas.  So I wonder how much… also the parameter that I use is like if you look what Keilisch  has produced by himself without Montague and what he has written with Montague…  That's very clear how different it is. Yes. So then indeed maybe he wasn't somebody who very easily cooperated with other people  on a level of equal exchange, but I mean that was partly because he was so extremely good and quick.  And there are these corporations,  and I actually sort of know that from my own experience.  I've not done much joint writing with other people.  I've done a fair amount of these, but there's  only one case where I really felt this was a sort of completely symmetric situation.  It was a bubble of cheese on paper. For instance, working with Uwe Leiler was always fun. With Anchi we had done a number of things together also.  But in those two cases, I actually wrote every single word.  And it may have been that with Montague it was also like that with Kailish.  And I cannot think now.  I mean there was this joint project with Pfeffermann. There was  also this joint book on set theory with Toski and Scott.  You know the book was completed. I do have the book.  Did it actually ever appear?  Oh yeah. No, no. I mean the book was ready to be sent to the publisher for the  proof. And actually not even more than that.  So the first draft had been sent to the publisher and so now there were corrections to make  to the proof.  So there's these letters that Dana said, please Alfred, you know, go through…  Please do.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I remember those from Montague.  I got those also.  Yeah, yeah. I remember that it's from Montague.  In the Tarski's archive there is the entire manuscript and I talked to Dana about it and  he confirmed the existence of the full manuscript except that at least the version that I heard  from Dana is that Montague died when the manuscript was, they were checking the post in 1971.  And neither of them felt that they could go back to it.  Yeah, so I remember Dana saying before this time, when I was at UCLA, once telling me  that, oh yeah, I asked him I think, I had heard the stories from Montague.  Montague also was getting tired of it.  And then Dana said, yes, sort of boring.  It is theorem, prove, theorem, prove, theorem, prove.  Pro, Ferum, Pro, and where then are we? Something like that.  So he really had lost faith that it was really much worth publishing.  So that may be one reason why he wasn't particularly eager to sort of put extra time in it. Even after Montague, we also knew.  We would come down also for this project while I was at UCLA, ever so often for the two of  them to work on that.  But he certainly had lost his heart in it.  When you say Montague, you mean he means Martin and Dana?  With he I meant Dana, but I think Richard was the same.  So that was a cooperation which was certainly at a level of equal power,  but it didn't feel to me like it's a sort of cooperation,  where there is the joint excitement of discovering new things.  But don't you think that it was partly related to the nature of the project to begin with?  Probably.  If I understand correctly what Dana told me and the material that I found,  the idea came to the two of them because they both took  Tarski's courses at Berkeley, their own notes, and the idea was like, why don't we turn that  material into something that is more systematic, is presentable as a book, and can be shared  with others. And you know, already in this, there is, you know, this happens, we're talking about  people that were students 15 years earlier. Now they have their own profile, their own career,  their own way of looking at things. And they want to write, you know, it's almost like when you want  to go back to be your child, like your father's child, you know, in the meantime you've grown up.  And so I think that there  was like both in the way they were looking at the specific issues that were  addressed but also the kind of dynamics.  And of course another important aspect of it is that set theory had evolved so enormously. So, Coen's probe for 63 and then there was this whole revolution of people doing forcing  and proving all sorts of results.  So against that background, this sort of classical stuff of that's very… may have looked…  I mean, Dana after all was involved in,  in, in going through Cohen's proof and then giving  this new Boolean valued logic proof of the results.  So he in particular must have felt that this was sort of an anachronism.  Yeah. So, so that, that,  that as far as the question is concerned, how much this kind of, I repeat myself, this  joy of joint discovery in joint works and writing joint paper is concerned, I can't  think of a very clear example in the case of Montague.  I got a little more into the ring of things as this sort of practice of his getting me as his sparring partner went on.  So I think the last one was this English as a formal language.  And there I thought I actually sort of made some real contributions and still very minor  in comparison to his. But still, I mean apparently  since Barbara Partit-Ponstoltzman she found, she went through the archives, there was a  remark that he wrote down or wrote to someone that he actually wanted to make me co-author  in that paper. I think it's entirely right that he didn't. But still, I mean, there was I think also I could feel that at least in some of the  discussions there was this sense of joint excitement of A saying something and then  B picking it up.  But how much of that there has been in his entire career, I don't know.  Also, I was thinking as while you were saying this, Montague is doing something  that with you he was working on something that normally he wouldn't be working on.  I think there is always like that even for like somebody of like Montague is caliber  there is a difference between working on paths they're already familiar to you  you know how to move you know how to present things you know what to say you  know how people would react you know how to maybe build arguments and now you're  moving towards something that is significantly different we start to what  you've done so far when you say that, what in particular are you thinking?  So what I'm thinking is like in English as a formal language, he's saying, okay, I have  in my hands, I've already created a powerful tool, I have I-order logic, and now I want  to show that you can apply it to like natural language in a systematic way, in a way that...  There were the papers that he wrote years earlier with Keilisch where they were looking at that.  It's not like in the demonstrative. There were cases in which Montague, as many others in that tradition,  used natural language to make a point in case of indexicals and so on.  But here in English as a formal language, it's trying to do something else.  So…  Yes and no.  So this was an offshoot, true enough, of this general project he had developed of redeveloping the formal framework for doing philosophy, absolutely generally.  And that framework for him was this high order intentional logic.  And he worked on that.  I still also remember that I was part of that a little bit also, but not very much.  And that was already, I think, going on when I got through UCLA.  Certainly it was going on in the 66 and 67.  And there was an extensive correspondence about that between Montague and Scott,  and this guy John Lemon, and what else was part of that? Kaplan, yeah, and maybe  another couple of people on exactly how to set this up and some features of that system  in fact that people now don't really use anymore. Well, I'm not even sure that that is so, but where  constants of type alpha and variables of type alpha are treated differently. So, you actually…  so that because the constants can in general be of actually type S alpha,  whereas the variables are just of type alpha, you get some curious features like  universal instantiation is no longer valid. And so that was the result of very  extensive correspondence with other people. And I mean I still remember him saying, I think that was in, I can't remember exactly,  it might even have been that first semester I was there, but it's more likely it was in in 1966, where he said, more than literally,  until now I always thought that… you know that quotation.  Yeah, that's from the On the Nature of Certain Philosophical Entities.  It's the very beginning of like… which is a statement.  Like it's so clearly, you know, up to now, you know,  at least one philosopher that is myself, I thought that, you know,  the problems of philosophy  could be handled by set theory. But philosophy is always able to renew itself. It's really  a program. You can totally see that.  So, higher-intentional logic is defined in's defined in intentional… I think it's intentional  and… was it phropatics and intentional logic?  Yeah.  Yeah.  So that was the formal framework and then on the nature of some philosophical entities  was the first application to this whole range of different notions and different branches of philosophy. And then the interest in the  semantics and logic of natural languages also therefore had been there for a long time.  So in the textbook with Keilisch, what is it called?  Technique of… Wat heet het? Techniek van voorwaarden.  Logiek en dan koorden. Ja, logiek van voorwaarden.  Ja, dus daar gaat het om.  In de graad is het goed, de eerste propositie van logiek en dan de prelieke logiek.  En het is altijd een soort van, ja, gegeven je de rol in dit systeem van natuurlijke verducte always sort of give you the roles in this system of natural deduction and then there  are endless numbers of exercises where you have to translate the premises into propositional  or Friedrich's logic and also the conclusion and then derive the conclusion from the premises. And somewhere in that book, it came out in  64, so it's from some time before that, a little passage where the authors say  well actually it is sort of curious that we are so precise about everything that has to do with the  formalism of propositional and predicate logic. And so to solve these exercises  you really have to get the deduction right. And it's very clear whether you go the right or wrong.  But when we ask our students to put these natural language premises in, translate them into logic,  we don't tell them exactly what to do. We rely on their ability to do that because they know their own language  and they know how predicate logic works. There is a gap there.  I agree, but remember the introduction on page one of the book, and there is no doubt  the introduction was written by Montague, Although we talk about the authors. He clearly says that...  where he basically says there is no...  let's see if I remember the wording correctly, the premise is like...  It touches on the issue of like, is there  a logical structure for English  or for ordinary language.  And he says something like, this is an open issue,  he doesn't use this word, but that's what he means.  In any case, whatever it is, it wouldn't be a topic of interest for this author.  So to me, this is what's striking, because I agree with you,  that in their doing, they reach the point in which they realize that if you want to do this systematically, there's a gap. How  do you go? You ask to translate, but by means of what you do that translation. They are  aware, but they judge. At that stage, probably, the introduction was written, at least from  the manuscripts that I found, it was the last thing to be written in 1963 before he was sent to  the publishing procedures that came out in 1964. So in 1963, most of you thought that  there was not much interest in investigating English through the rules of logic. In 1967,  that's when he wrote on the nature of certain philosophical entity, it's shifted completely  because now he says the opposite. And one year later, even in English as a formal language, he even tells that there is no significant  difference between the two.  Yeah, that's a good point. Even if the problem was recognized much earlier…  For him it was not a relevant problem. And that's why I was trying to suggest that  probably that Amsterdam experience, the teaching with Stahl  at seminar on philosophy of language where they discuss quine, word and object, and they  discuss Chomsky, aspects of your syntax, may have been a model himself who is always very careful with his  footnotes.  He says in the footnote number one of English as a Formal Language says, the ideas in this  paper were initially adumbrated.  And I like the fact they used the word adumbrated.  He's always careful in the lexical choice.  It means it's not that my ideas were clear, but something started there.  There was like, you know, something that was just a shadow at that time and then slowly became or quickly  became something clearer to me in the seminar that he taught with Stahl.  That could well be.  I don't know how much Stahl contributed to that, but that's another matter.  No, I think that essentially…  Well, Stahl's contribution was…  I found a couple of students that were in the class that I was able to interview,  was translating things for the students so the students could better understand what Montague was doing on the light board.  And was the other thing that Montague thanks him for, was that  Montague had not read Quine's yet. So he read Quine's book in preparation for the Seminaries.  That's what he says in the letter that he writes to Stahl. And the second thing is that Stahl forced him to think about Chomsky,  that clearly he did not know in terms of like any other aspects.  That's not true. I still remember very vividly, and it was only three weeks after I arrived  at UCLA, so late September 1965, Montague said to me, I've just started reading this book by Tromsky, Aspects of Sphere of Syntax, and it's really very good.  What?  That's something.  Wait.  Okay, okay.  Please.  So he was really  interested.  He read the first chapter  or so.  And so I said,  okay,  I'd better read that too.  And I didn't get very far.  But one reason  why I didn't get very far was But one reason why I didn't get very far was that  only maybe two or three weeks after that he talked to me again and I said, I went on with  this book. It's absolutely dreadful, it's a scandal. So the general... I mean it's true that aspects of the syntax, like quite  a few other things that Chomsky has written. I said at the beginning it's really very  forceful and also seems clean and clear. And yeah, that Montague would have liked that is a little surprising, but then he was waiting  for somebody who actually implements that with the same level of exactitude that he's  just been preaching.  And that was then simply not there.  And so he turned completely against it.  But it's so that's…  And that you're sure that we're talking about fall 1965, it's not fall 1966?  Absolutely. It was one of the first, very early on in my being there.  I wonder why then he downplays, like, you know, he basically talks to Stahl as if unless he wants… because Stahl doesn't hide the  fact that he's very much interested in Chomsky's work. That's pretty clear. Monti, you must  have known that very clearly.  But maybe I misremember this, as it was only the fall of 1966, but in that case it would also be very strange.  We said he just started reading.  No, that would be strange because if it's a  total seminar they discuss this.  You're right, maybe he had his own reason not to be more cautious with style.  So I don't know.  I mean it could very well have been mentioned that this semester in Amsterdam in 1966 was very important for this development,  but that it only started there, I don't know.  I mean, it was after all working all the time, so that some of it might have happened there in how far this particular seminar  with Stahl  was  instrumental  in it  in the sense  that there was  some kind of  interaction  between them  no I don't  think so  no I don't  think so  so one reason  why I doubt  that is  there was  some exchange  between Stahl when he was still alive but quite a while  after Montague had already died.  Is the name Henk van Gaal?  Oh yeah, oh sure.  He was one of the students in the seminar.  Yeah, right.  And there was some kind of exchange.  It was really nasty about Montague getting up there and writing things on the board and  nobody understand anything. about Montague, getting up there and writing things on the board and nobody  understand anything. And so almost as if the man was a kind of freak.  So this exchange was a public exchange or was it private?  I'm trying to remember where I saw it, but I read it. Because that's roughly the story that Hank told me.  And you know, well, of course, it all depends on the background that you have.  I see.  So you talked to Hank about this.  Yeah, I interviewed him.  And that's where I got the story.  So his version is that, but again, I tried very politely to understand his background  that time.  He did not have a logic background that would be able to even understand the basics of what  Montague wanted to do. Well, Montague probably was taking certain things for granted, and  so part of Stiles' presence was to help build a bridge between Montagu, since he must have talked  to Montagu earlier, he must have known him.  They knew each other in Montagu, and they also knew each other in 1962.  Well, I assume that's when they met, I guess.  That could well have been.  Stahl was young, was born in the same year as Montagu, I think 1930, if I remember correctly.  So they were both 32-year-old.  Stahl became a professor in Amsterdam in the fall of 1962.  That's when he started teaching.  I see.  I see.  But he was part of the circle around Bette.  He had been a student of Bette.  I don't know where…  He was exposed to Montague's work… sorry, to Chomsky's work because of  Bert.  It wasn't Bert, but one that brought Syntaxic Structure to Holland.  That's what I read, that he was part of…  So, Bert was very instrumental in getting Chomsky established in the Netherlands.  He had – and I'm trying to remember now, I think that  might be the second semester I was there, so it would have been the spring of 62.  He had a seminar where we read syntactic structures. And that was very  interesting. He had, I mean people it were, on the one hand, his own students,  his handful, so Dick and I were there. But there were also a number of people at the  level of assistant, either just before finishing their PhD or after. And really the crème de la crème of the young linguists in Holland, so Graak  was there and so Soon was there and Soon was by far the most brilliant of these people,  it was my impression. And what was his name? There were four or five, anyway, sorry, it was a better name.  So these people had assistant positions with professors of linguistics in the Netherlands.  And it was agreed among all of us that we should never say that they attended this seminar  because they might be fired.  Wow.  That was the situation?  I mean, this is way beyond indifference because this is hatred.  It was really.  It was agreed.  Wow. okay.  And so, so, Bette played a very important role in getting Chomsky to be, yeah, known by people.  And of course, Syntactic Strategies is such a totally different book from what you get later. And you may actually wonder in what sense it is about linguistics.  I mean, like Rispos and people like that.  But it's extremely interesting and very well written.  And we all felt we learnt a lot from it.  But Stalin was not yet there.  And I'm pretty sure he was not at this seminar.  Oh, it was not at the seminar, I see.  No.  So I don't know where he had been.  He already then spent a considerable amount of time in India. In India… in any case, I mean, I don't think I ever saw him before the first lecture  in the fall of 62 that I… by him that I went to the seminar.  So you did go to a seminar where he was teaching?  Yeah, yeah.  So you saw him teaching?  Yeah, yeah. Ie, ie, roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Ie, ie, roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorol. Roedd yn ddiddorolwy'n cofio fy mod wedi mynd i ddwy o'r rhain ac roedd Dick a fi'n  ddim yn ddigon ymddygiadol. Mae'r papurau yn ddiddorol iawn, ond mae'n hynod o gyffrous.  Rwy'n cofio dau dogma, roedd yn dweud bod wedi agor byd cyfan i mi.  Ond roedd yn dweud fy mhrofiadau ei hun, dwi ddim yn ei hafodd yn hynny.  Stahl's own comments, I did not appreciate all that much. Anyway, so he then, he didn't stay, I don't know, when did he go to Berkeley? Was it 67 or something?  No, I think he was, so Montague was also there in 66. There was the time when he basically started fighting there in  Amsterdam, when Stael had all this intense fight. And in 1969...  It was deathly.  He gets, you know that he got a one-year appointment at MIT where, so for one year  he was hired at MIT. And besides seeing that, I wrote the confirmation because at MIT one  of the courses that he taught was co-taught together with the Stanford professor that  only recently retired that wrote the paper with his former wife on factivity.  Kiparsky.  Kiparsky.  Oh, really? They taught a course together.ivity. Kiparsky? Kiparsky. Oh, really?  They taught a course together.  Stahl and Kiparsky?  Stahl and Kiparsky, yes.  That's interesting.  And so on.  And for one year.  And I do know that because there are the letters, Montague kept the letters.  So Stahl was desperate looking for something that was permanent in the US.  He had decided that he wanted to go back to the letters. So Stahl was desperate looking for something that was permanent in the US.  He had decided that he wanted to go back to the US. I think at that point he also decided that  he wanted to leave as a gay man. I actually learned that only very recently. I didn't know that.  He wanted to do that in the US. And so in this correspondence with Richard you can see that,  first of all, they were clearly friends. And I think this was the main connection between the two of them. I never saw any clear evidence of  an intense intellectual connection, but they were very, very close as friends. I think Montague felt  very comfortable with him, and I think the thing was reciprocated. When Montague goes to Amsterdam in the second time when you're ready to go away.  In 1966, yeah.  In 1966, at the very beginning, let me see, at the very beginning or the very end of the  sabbatical, he stays at Stael's place.  Beginning.  And there's these letters where he says, you know, Stael tells how to.  And maybe even at the very end when Montague has to wrap up things, he stays,  he spent a couple of weeks because he, yes, he stayed in a star's place because then he  writes a letter and he kept a copy of the letter that says, Fritz, I hope that everything you found  is fine. We did follow your instruction on leaving something in a certain way. Because  I think Montague was there with that student of his, Barry. Oh, yes.  That was a strange case because I think in order not to fight in the Vietnam War,  he had gone first to Africa and then they met again.  I didn't know that.  I met the guy.  Oh, you met the guy.  Yeah, he was very brilliant.  I never knew exactly.  He sort of dropped out of school, I think, in the end.  But he was extraordinarily smart.  Yeah, that's what people seem to remember.  He also went to MIT.  When he died, his classmates wrote in their, I think, some sort of annual letter, their  memories of him.  The two things that were emerging he died relatively young I completely yeah  it's unclear what happened to him he had a tormented like you know it was a  complicated individual it's a Jewish also, I believe, was he?  I don't remember that, but he could be.  It's just that everybody had noticed that he was an extremely brilliant person.  Because at a certain point, I think what Montague does, he manages to have him paid by the NSF  on his grant to support him in Amsterdam. Because he's arranging things  with Stael and then making clear, Stael, I don't, he doesn't need, I can support him,  I just need that you issue an official invitation so he can have access to the library or something  like that. So at least for part of the time that Montague was in Amsterdam, Barry was  in Amsterdam as well. And then in the end they stayed for the last few weeks  and then Barry went somewhere else to add Stahl's place. So that makes me think that  there is a lot of, there was lots of closeness. Then when Stahl is really desperate, he wants  to find a stable job, Montague activates his network. And I cannot completely exclude the  fact that in Berkeley he managed to find something,  and Berkeley was also because of Montague's intervention.  And then as soon as he arrived to Berkeley, he basically separated…  I mean he brought his wife and the two daughters that they had to Berkeley.  Who did?  Oh, Stahl.  Stahl, sorry.  Stahl brought from Amsterdam the wife and the two daughters.  But I would say, let's see, already when they moved to  Berkeley in 1971, I was told they separated and so they were…  Yeah, I never knew that, but I got this information, I can't remember why, I think I can reconstruct  why I actually looked at this, but this was a obituary written by  Jorn van Benten about Stahl and that also revealed that.  I think it's pretty clear from the correspondence that they have that they are very open to  each other.  So my understanding is that Stahl was part of that group of people and talking to some…  Was Stahl already openly gay?  Or no, hopefully he wasn't.  Well, never knew.  But when he got married to…  You can tell that…  I don't know.  I mean like my main source about this edge is between facts and gossip because it's the late Søren.  I see.  And he was part of that group of academics of that generation and gay men of that generation.  And according to him, if you were part of that group, you knew very well about style.  I see.  And if you were not part of that group, because it was typical of that generation,  you didn't know.  Yeah, yeah.  And so Stahl had that life up to the point in which he moved to the U.S.  Once he moved to the U.S., at that point he felt that, especially in an environment like  Berkeley, he felt that he did not have to do…  And he joins Berkeley, we are early 70s, so it's this cultural culture that is kicking  in and so it becomes less. And also, he has Montague's model. He sees that you can be,  I don't want to use the word open because today being open again means something else,  but Montague never pretended to be married, never pretended to have a wife and so on.  So he had his own way of living his life and probably there was a model for Stahl as well.  So that's my main source.  My understanding though is that from the way they talk to each other, of course they never  write directly because those are things you don't write in those days. But it sounds like they are so close that I would be surprised if they don't have  familiarity also in that aspect of their life.  And probably this was a further element of bonding between the two of them.  So they understood each other in that sense, and a lot of peer support. Yeah, it's amazing that I should never have even, only even have the slightest inkling  of this.  I mean, of course, I knew about Richard's gain is well enough, but…  It's like, on the other hand, so going back to your experience with Montague, my understanding is that your  application was something that went through in an unusual way but also fast because you  were not hearing anything, you got worried, you wrote Montague, it took some time.  I think actually I should tell you this story because it is as much a story about Monnier as it is about  me. And this is a story that you know some aspects of already. Maybe I told you this  and then you can just stop me, but maybe I didn't. So because this four-, Institute of International Education, didn't even send my stuff to UCLA.  After I had explicitly asked them to do so, I got only sort of the beginning of August another letter from von der Hussein saying,  we still haven't received anything from you.  Have you actually lost interest in me?  Then I wrote back immediately, I'm gone.  I didn't have, I asked him explicitly, and of course I want to come.  And then quite soon after that, it was middle of August, I got a telegram from Kalish, who  was chairman at the time, if they would waive my prelims.  This is something that had been raised.  I mean, I'd done so much.  Of course, we were ready.  So I actually asked whether that would be possible, if we would waive your prelims  would you accept a fellowship? Whereupon I immediately answered, to come to members  of the letter or telegram, yes of course I would come. And then I mean it was very little  time so I had thereby accepted and so then I got ready and I got to UCLA beginning of September.  Everything seemed alright. I was staying at the time still as I told you, with what you, in his Cardinal Richelieu bed.  So that's the kind of furniture that he had?  He had bought it and I'd sold it to him as a bed that had belonged to Cardinal Richelieu.  It looked like one but anyway it was comfortable enough. And then the first departmental meeting of the Philosophy Department, there were a number  of people who attacked Kehles for having sent y telegram hon i mi heb gael cwestiwn iddyn nhw.  Felly roedd Richard yn amlwg eisiau cymryd pwysau ar Caelish ac roedd yn debyg iawn o fod yn anodd i gael cymryd pobl yn y cyfnod oaelish yn ymwneud â hynny.  Pan oedd yn cael ei ddysgu gan rhai o'i cydweithwyr penodol,  dydw i ddim yn ei ddweud ei fod yn gallu dod yma ac yn gwneud i mi…  roedd yn gyfweliadol, nid ydych chi'n gweld hynny.  Ac yna, roedd Montagu yn cael ei ddweud yn hollol ffurio. you see that?" And then Montague got absolutely furious and gave Calish a little lesson about  semantics and pragmatics and really seems to have blown his top. And then, well, the other people probably didn't like the scene but thought he was right.  And so the whole thing was tabled.  So, I mean, some of the people actually had basically said he can stay,  but only if he does his prelims like everybody else.  everybody else. And then it was going to be a matter that, well there were also the junior people in the department, it was a year when they had hired a whole range of people, most  of whom actually did not make it to tenure. And one we were so sure of is that he went and did something that he should not have done.  He went to see some of these younger people and say, you don't know why this place works,  but if you actually support Kalish in this, I will never forgive you.  And these junior, I mean, they'd been in the job only for a couple  of months. I mean, they really didn't know what to do. And they'd heard that this was  a very famous but also somewhat volatile professor. So they went to Kalish as the chairman. And a'r cyngor wedyn, yn hytrach na...  fe wnaeth hi'n gwych iawn,  doedd e ddim yn ei olygu fel hynny.  Nawr gadewch i ni gyd-drethu a chyfrannu hyn.  Roedd yn gofyn iddyn nhw ysgrifennu llythyr o ôl y llaw Montagu  a'u casglu ac yn eu hysbysebui'r rhain a chyflwyno'r rhain i'r dyn. Ac nid oedd Montagu yn gwybod unrhyw beth am hyn,  hyd yn oed pan oedd wedi cael ei ddysgu gan dyn.  Ac roedd yn teimlo'n ddifrifol iawn ei fod wedi'i ddysgu.  Roedd hwn yn berson a'i gwybod fel un o'i ffrindiaid, neu efallai ei ffrindiaid gorau. wounded by that. This was a person that he considered one of his best, or perhaps his best  friend. And that caused a rift within the department. And I think one of the junior people  one of the junior people who had just come, Keith Gunnarsson, I mean he told me at one point, he said, I never wanted that to happen. And one person who was also junior but was  already there, was Howard Sobel. He came, he was the one junior person who came out in support of Montague.  Very strongly, and he didn't get tenure, and we all felt that that was completely  unjustified by his scientific accomplishments.  And so that led to this, Broward was just, I think, just when I was leaving.  It started with a semester before.  But so during all the years I was at UCLA,  there was this small group of very devoted students of Montague's that came to all  the seminars and we went out to dinner together and afterwards and so forth.  That was a source of support and he had very good relations with the mathematics department.  But within the philosophy department, he felt pretty much completely isolated at that point.  I think the only one that he managed to build some kind of relationship, of course, in a way that you can imagine given the difference in age and status, was also Church.  Well, yeah, so Church came a little later.  So he was out of all this to begin with.  Yeah, I think I told you that I found that message.  And since you were able to appreciate because you knew, you know who also Churchill was  and that kind of personality.  Now imagine Alonso Churchill writes a note to Montague that says,  Dear Montague, I didn't realize that the relationship with Kehlich had reached this point.  I wish I could do anything, but I don't see anything that I can do. So I assume, since  there is nothing else said, I assume that he must have seen something either at the  faculty meeting or in the interaction with them. And this is something written in 19…  so he arrived, it was 1967.  Seven, I guess.  Yeah, and I think it was like 1968.  Yeah, yeah, so after having having media for a little while.  To me, Alonzo Church has always been described as an extremely reserved person.  But much more observant than one might have expected.  Somebody who was a very careful observer that valued his own privacy very much. He would come to the department at a certain time when other people were not around, he would have his own routine. And I also  see the kind of like exchanges that normally he would have with Montague, even the fact  that we're both involved with the Journal of Symbolic Logic and Montague played an important  role in helping him once he moved to UCLA. And so writing that note must have been something that he felt very strongly about,  otherwise he wouldn't have.  He was not a gossiper.  And so from a certain point of view, and I was also told,  and try to remember who told me the story,  oh Kaplan, oh yeah sure, Kaplan of course, that in that period after the breaking up with Cage, Montague  became on the one hand very isolated but also very strongly opinionated during the faculty meeting  even more than earlier, almost to make a point. When he would start, it would basically be impossible to  stop. There was only one person that could stop him, and this would be Alonso Church.  And normally the way it would go is that, that's how Kaplan was describing the situation,  Church would be in his corner, you think he would be sleeping, you know?  Like an iceberg, yes.  And then at a certain point he would say say, Montague. And Richard would stop.  And that would be silence. And that would be… Well, if anybody else tried to say anything,  he would actually increase the amount in the case of there was the only person Montague felt kind of  intellectual and personal reverence towards, and that was church. So what you say totally matches this kind of picture of, although what I  didn't know is this behavior by Kalish which I know is even more striking even  you know as you know Kalish knew Montague very well and Montague knew that  Kalish knew him very well and he considered a very close friend, if not the closest friend that he had. Somebody who knew very personal  things about him. Kalish went to rescue Montague with his wife Veronica when they were still  together. We're talking about like the late 50s.  Were they at this trial? No, at UCLA.  Montague brought somebody back, some black guys.  These black guys basically stole…  This is when he and Bob were still living…  In the canyon.  Yeah, in the canyon.  So Bob was not at home.  The idea would be that they would be drinking something together.  First I think Ferran wrote the story correctly. So he brought one guy, then the guy had some friends.  Okay, invite your friends too. The friends came over and essentially what they did,  first they tied up Montague so that he couldn't move and he couldn't scream like with rope and so on.  And then they stole whatever they could from the house  and they damaged other things and so slowly Montague was able to reach the phone and call  Kalish and he and Veronica arrived and so they helped him they took him back home  he was all shaken and  And then there was... what we remember like, what we remember very vividly of the  Montague's worries at that point was not that he had been in danger with his life, but his  worry was like, how will Bob react?  They touched his stuff, they took some of his stuff away, how is he going to react? And so, now, Kalish knew all this,  and you know, and Montague knew that Kalish knew all this. You don't expect a person that knows so  much about you, that you trust so much, that you call in this moment of desperation to behave in  that way. And I think they must have felt like, on top of the fact that I think the two of them had  talked earlier on, or had shared this idea that once they took over the department, one as a chair and, you know, Montague, up to that point in that crisis, for more than one year he had been Director of Graduate Studies.  In 1964, that's when Kalish becomes chair, right after the textbook, and Montague becomes Director of Graduate Studies.  becomes chair and right after the textbook and Montague becomes director of graduate studies.  Less than one year later, Kalish has a letter signed by the senior professor and they say, sorry this was his own decision as chair, said after consulting the senior professor we decided  that we want to thank you for your services, Director of Graduate Studies, and this is going to  end, blah, blah, blah, right away, essentially. So they take him. And I think that comes all  from this story. There was another further punishment on top of the letter that he received  from the Dean. I have the letter that Katie showed where he says, you're done as Director  of Graduate thing. So one aspect of this was, I think, also that this duo, Montague and Caylish, was perceived  by people in the department as sort of Montague with his assistant. And when Cage became chairman, this particular telegram really smelt to people  like this was something else that he, something that he shouldn't have done and that Montague sort of forced him to do or got him to do.  Even if they didn't feel it that way, Keilish probably thought they would see it or did  see it that way.  And he wanted to assert his independence.  I mean, this absurd reaction from what I… You don't think so?  No, no, I think you're totally right. And I think it was a very poor decision by  Kehlish because it was a… I mean, there is a difference… Okay, I understand that  as a chair you need to try to keep all the different souls of the department together  because that's part of your task. As a chair you cannot fight a unilateral war, otherwise you're not  chair. But that's different from as a chair you also have the role to try to embody a  vision of what you want to do in your department, share it with others, try to get consensus  about it. It's not that as a chair you just stamp things or you just accept everything. So if  you become chair, you become chair, but you still have somebody with a vision. If you  have discussed that vision with a colleague like Montague, essentially there is a way  to do philosophy which is heavily driven by logic. Now discuss it, bring it to the department  in terms of like, well, let's hire people in a certain way. Let's go in a certain direction  Let's get some certain kind of students. For example  There were other ways to deal with your situation. It says look, yes, I mean we're dealing with an exceptional students  We have plenty of evidence of that. Do we really want to miss this opportunity?  Now as a chair  I'm willing if you have other cases of students that have so gifted with that evidence,  that have really gotten this kind of graduate status, to make exception to that.  So this is not just unique for this person, but unique if these conditions are satisfied in the other cases.  We want to get those students. That's what brings the department up.  There are many ways as a chair you can go around this.  And I think what happened there is exactly what you're describing.  It's one of those cases of personality issues. Finally, it felt almost like, okay, I can get rid of this feeling  controlled by… I exist, I am the chair, I have the power. And that was the beginning  of the end, basically. Did you feel that when you were in the department? I tried to remember how much I knew about this whole thing.  I mean, I knew it certainly towards the end of that first semester.  They were actually pretty decent in keeping me out of it.  That's nice. I'm glad to hear that. Yeah, I mean, I really am grateful to the entire department for that.  But, I mean, I knew about this, this, this, I mean, Montague had told me about,  about this, these letters and, and, and he was so deeply offended and,  letters and he was so deeply offended. Wounded is the best word for it. And so it became clear exactly what the actual thing was that triggered it.  I don't know if it was already then, but it was quite good friends with Howard Sobel.  And he and Willa May also have told me about it.  I cannot remember that, but I certainly do know.  I knew it certainly by the end of that first semester, but not that anybody sort of told  me officially when we actually thought you should do the prisms  but you don't have to after all or something like that.  And there was no like weird behaviour by any other?  It's not that they treated differently in a kind of weird way or something?  No, not at all.  No, I actually was pretty good terms with many of the people I did have very little to do with because most  of the courses I was free to do that I took in mathematics. So I thought I was sort of  an odd thing out. I mean I was never really part of the student body and I was only part ac roedd yn unig y rhan o'r clyg bach hwnnw o gwmpas, ond dim ond ddwy myfyrwyr o  ddysg, rwy'n credu, ac yn yr eraill roedd un, roedd ddwy o fathemateg a...  na, nid oedd, nid oedd, roedd yn fwy, roedd tri myfyrwyr o ddysg, felly roedd hynny'n from Vosagy. So those I knew reasonably well. But there were people from other departments  also. And for instance, Jeff Pellichet. So he was somebody who was, I think, this same  year, maybe he came a year before me. And I knew him, but we had no contact.  I believe Jeff came a little after you because he finished much later than you to begin with.  Yeah, he stayed much longer.  He stayed much longer, but I believe that his dissertation was 1973.  Was it that late?  Yeah, yeah.  Maybe he came...  Yeah, I think he came in 1967.  Is it possible? Because the reason why I do have it in my records I can check but I'm the reason why is because first of all you know I know that he stays much longer but  I also he also told me about the story of like he arrived that year, it was Montague that organized  the welcome, the beginning of the year party at his place on Holland Drive.  And Montague moved to the place on Holland Drive in 1964.  Was it that short before I came?  I didn't know that.  Yeah, 1964.  So first he became full professor, which was 1962, and then he bought a  place on Holland Drive in 1964. So when you went to that place, it was 1965. They had been there  for roughly one year. But Jeff remembers clearly that Montague organized the party at the new  place, the larger place with the garden outside  and Montague was playing.  What is the larger place?  The one where you stayed.  I see.  Because the one on Beverly Cliffs was a small place.  It was a two-bedroom, one bathroom, right there on the canyon with just a little, not  even a real courtyard in the  back.  I went to visit it.  Well, the place where you stayed unfortunately was destroyed, was demolished because of the  mansion.  But I had the pictures that the police collected and I can see that it was definitely a two-store  house.  It was quite spacious.  Have you seen the new place actually? From outside because there are all these walls. I mean it's like typical of this like David Kaplan was showing me in his area, Pacific Palace is there doing the same thing.  So they buy these nice spaces and then they build these houses that are big boxes that  occupy the entire space.  There is not outdoor space anymore because now you sell according to how many square  feet you have.  So, it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space.  I think it's a very interesting space. I think it's a very interesting space. I think it's a very interesting space. I think it's a very interesting space. I think it's a the entire space. There is no outdoor space anymore because now you sell according to how many square feet you have.  So,  the place from outside I can only barely saw it looks like one of these boxes. Well, I didn't see the house from outside  because I don't have many pictures of the inside. I only saw a couple of pictures that the police took, but that's just the bedroom.  Yeah, yeah. I only saw a couple of pictures that the police took, but that's just the bedroom. So actually Hans, since you stayed at Richard's place, do you remember, first of all, your  bedroom was on the second floor or on the ground floor?  I thought it was on the ground floor, but I'm not entirely sure anymore.  Okay.  So because I was trying to get a kind of map of that house, which was in general just to have an idea, but also because of the night of the murder and the kind of description that the roommate gives to the police.  At some point about… Bob had moved out and he did want to be alone and so he had students live in as a form of protection.  I thought those were on the second floor, but I don't know actually.  I never overlapped with…  Yeah, that's how it just happened.  Maybe it was possible that the house had one bedroom on top of the master bedroom, maybe  one bedroom on the second floor.  Well, I meant…  Let's use the Americans…  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  The grand floor and the first floor.  I meant the grand floor and the second floor.  I wanted there was maybe two bedrooms, the master bedroom and one bedroom on the first  floor and then maybe there was another room. It was sort of off the site I remember, but my memory is not really reliable as far as  that's concerned.  I thought it was off the…  There was a living room with a harpsichord.  Yeah, that's what Jeff told me as well.  That was a very nice room and I thought it was over there, but I don't know.  So I think, so Jeff, I believe, my understanding is that Jeff was planning to work with David  Lewis and then David Lewis left.  It was 1969 he left, I believe, and then he started Prince in 1970.  I think he had a function in between.  He was in England, I think.  The year that he was in England was the year that I was in Holland.  So that was in 1969.  And then in 1970 he started to pre-install.  So essentially, Louis was in New Zealand for three years, 1966 to 1969.  And I think Jeff moved moved there like in 67.  That sounds right.  I've just got it here, his education.  He got his MA from the University of Nebraska at 66 and he got his PhD from UCLA in 71.  Oh, 71.  So maybe he was 66 when he moved there because he told me that he was coming as a friend. Like yes, okay, he was 66, so one year after you, and in 71, so a few months after Montague  died.  So he wanted to work with you, Louis left, he asked Montague if he wanted to be a student,  and then Montague died, and in the end I believe…  Montague first?  Yeah, yeah, yeah, officially it was Montague first. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Officially he was Montague.  Yeah.  I mean, so not very long ago I asked Jeff what he remembered from this time and he said  he never had anything or very much to do with Montague.  It had gone to him at some point but it it sounded like he'd never felt really part of this group,  and he certainly wasn't while I was there.  I think that his goal, at least what he told me, is that his desire was to work with David  Lewis, except that when David Lewis left, plus he left to go to England, so it was not even possible to come. It was not realistic,  on top of the fact that he needed somebody in the department. And so that's when, for him, like,  okay, the most, the closest that he could find was Montague. And he said, you know, Montague was very  open, you know, in a nice way, not like, you know, he understood the situation.  Yeah, I know, exactly.  I don't think there was like, oh yeah, I see that there's a lot in common among us.  But as you said earlier, he understood that this was a student that had interests and things  and then was left without an advisor.  So the goal of the advisor is to help the student develop and give some guidance.  And this is a student left without guidance. So I think that was the level of interaction that they had.  That's what Jeff told me and that seems to be what you were just doing.  Yeah, and it's consistent also with that there was just very little time for that to develop into anything.  So, Hans, before I leave you, because I promised that I would leave you by 10, we are getting very close to that, we have four minutes left.  I want to ask you one thing, because I think it's a little bit of a natural closure of this topic, and then maybe tomorrow we can talk about David Lewis and what you know about the time that you were there, he was there, what you know about the interaction. One thing that I went back to the previous meetings that we had that we—I don't think  you said much about, maybe just a few things.  You were not at UCLA anymore when Richard died.  How did you learn about his—  I was in Holland that year.  So 1971 in March? Seventy, seventy, let's see this was, no sorry I made a mistake a moment ago, did I? I was in Holland from the fall of 70 to the fall of 71.  That was the year I stayed a number of times with the Lewis's while they were in Oxford.  So that was the year that David Lewis was in Oxford and I went to Princeton only after  that and then the first year there but they've been 71. So, so Judith Ng rang me.  Ah.  From, from, she was working at,  in Church's office at the time of the,  the review section of the JSL.  And so, yeah.  Oh, so it was awesome.  Yeah. I think I told you that I contacted her. Yeah, yeah. and so yeah. Oh, so it was awesome. Thank you.  I think I told you that I contacted her.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And that must have been soon after it happened.  Oh yeah, I mean she knew immediately. It was the day after or something.  Because it was Saturday night probably, the Sunday when the news went around.  Yeah, I can't remember what day it was.  Do you remember what she told you?  I think she told me that he had died and I think she may also have added that he was murdered, that one suspected him,  and it was pretty clear from the moment ago that that was what had happened.  And I'm so taken by the news that in this particular case, I don't  remember the exact wordings, but it was not a very long phone call but I mean yeah.  And were you completely surprised?  Yes and no. So this relates to this story that he has told me when Richard was tied up. He would take what seemed to me insane risks.  I don't know if I told you that before but so one of the things I thought was a real  real sign of trust towards me. I mean so I was I think I may have said that, during the three years I was  there, I was the only real link between his private life and his intellectual  and professional life. And it, I mean, yeah, so we'll run over time, but that's not very much.  You made a promise though, don't make me do it again.  We can also do that tomorrow if you like, but anyway.  No, no, finish.  Finish.  So there's more to be told.  So he picked me up and took me to his house.  He said the first thing was that you would meet Bob.  That was the first time.  Oh, Bob was there when you were out?  He was there, yeah.  It was a very short relation at that point already.  But so that was the first time I realized that Richard was gay.  I had no idea until that very moment.  He had not told you anything?  No, no.  Not even that he had somebody misplaced?  No.  So you arrived there and you were told you'd meet Bob.  Yeah, I was told you'd meet Bob.  I think I adjusted very well.  But it was really quite a sort of sudden, I mean I came from a world where this, I mean  I knew it existed as I meant, and nobody in my immediate environment to the extent that  I was aware of it was gay and I never thought of him in those terms.  And then during these two weeks and also afterwards, I was there often enough.  So he had this whole coterie of black gay men who, I think, I don't know whether they  were originally Bob's friends or his friends, but anyways it was really good for the language, it was quite charming and interesting.  And so yeah, since I was there I was sort of taken up, I mean I was just there.  So I think I adjusted quite well and never made a fuss about it. But it was really quite sort of being thrown into  the middle of it.  Wow. Well, from a certain point of view, you can also take it as an extreme gesture  of trust.  Absolutely. Already at that point.  You did not hide anything and you did not even try to separate the two worlds. You were  immediately put inside his complete world, the intellectual and the personal world.  I took it also that way.  So this other aspect of trust that I just wanted to mention is that later on he would then ask me to come along with him in two cars to Hollywood  Boulevard and he would go to one of these gay meeting places and he would  sit there and have a coffee or so and then all things worked out, he would find somebody, and then I would just go home.  And so it made me immensely sad, these occasions.  I mean, I felt so much, he felt so lonely. I can still see him sitting there and also I remember how he asked me for this act of support.  And then I went home and no idea what happened after that.  But these were people he had never seen before in his life. And  it was in a part of town where everybody knew that the people that would pick you up, that  could be any kind of... And my first thought was when I was growing up, this is probably a case where just this  kind of thing happened.  And it's still different when you pick up a single person, but if you pick up a group,  that is quite different.  There's a very different dynamic of power.  Yeah.  And also this kind of dynamic that you create within the group that they reinforce each other.  Can I ask you a very small question? You mentioned quickly that when you arrived and you were  introduced to Bob, you said the relationship was already falling apart. Is it because  said, well, the relationship was already falling apart. Is it because you perceived something or because there was tension between the two of them?  Well, it was not immediately, of course, but then they had these parties and also, well,  not only when the parties but also, so Bob wasn't there all the time and I really felt he was abusing  Richard and sort of yeah almost, it wasn't exactly emotional blackmail but it was something like that. I didn't like him very much at that point for this reason.  To the extent that there was still a relationship, it seemed to me very exploitative.  And later I have come to see, partly also through what you have told me,  that it wasn't a one-way street as far as that's concerned.  But the way it was at that particular point, I could only feel very sorry for Richard.  Well, thank you very much for sharing all this.  And sorry if I didn't keep my promise because now it's 10.06.

