SPEAKER_00: 0:00:00-0:07:46
 I've written to him because I hadn't been in touch for a while, I just sort of wanted to ask how he was.  And he wrote back with a problem that has been on his mind for a very long time and that is the following it's well translated in  English but it's not perfect is the it's the following paradigm you can say John  is taller than Bill John is shorter than Bill John is five inches taller than Bill. John is five  inches shorter than Bill. John is five feet tall but you cannot say he's five feet short.  That's the paradigm.  How do you explain this?  And so we got involved.  As you know, I worked on ethics a long time ago.  You went back too.  So we got interested.  I got interested first and then Anki sort of also.  So it grew into a kind of common project with Manfred and it's led to actually in important  ways quite a different theory from what there has been on the market so far. And so what distinguishes  it from other kinds of scalar adjectives is first the treatment of the scales, then the  distributive morphology approach to the syntax of different adjectival forms.  They're all generated from roots and the different forms are generated from the same root.  And the kind of standard regionally sort of like LF syntax that we use in order to get to the semantics.  And then also the way in which the semantic representations are conceived for the different  forms. And so we have an account of why in this paradigm  five feet short is peculiar and some people don't accept it at all. In terms of, well  so the basic idea, and it's quite different from most accounts of this in the literature, that if you try to treat five feet short  the way one can treat five feet tall  so as to make it come out right,  what goes wrong with five feet short  is that the semantic construction  leads to an interval that starts at zero and then goes  to the left rather than the right, and there is no left.  So when we actually got to this, I think at that point I was still on my own, but we were  actually quite pleased and so I don't know how much you know of the literature  but there's a very strong well group or subgroup who treats this problem by  saying that if you have a negative etiquette like short or small then its  extension is not intervals that go from zero to the  maximal degree but rather from the maximal degree to infinity. And then I have a story  why that goes wrong with... we combine that with a measure of phase, which is just  because all these intervals are infinite so you can't measure them.  And I never really believed in this  and I still don't believe in it today. It's a kind of artifact of a particular way of  going about the semantics of adjectives which started quite early on.  Originally it was just in order to deal with problems in the semantics of the complement  clauses to comparatives.  And so that's why they got into these intervals.  And then they found that if you negate such a formula, that one natural way is to give  the negation just a complement of the non-negated form of the adjective.  And so that's all the other intervals.  Yeah, it's kind of this work. That's what I was familiar with.  And I do remember that in dealing with these cases, there was some kind of, you know, semi-postulation  of this kind of interval, like who justifies it. On the other hand, actually, if I understand your approach correctly, it nicely fits also  with a relatively common assumption that when you're talking to numerals, you have by default  an at least interpretation.  And then pragmatic constraints restricts to the exact interpretation, and that would be  compatible in terms of directionality, because at least it goes from this level,  from this degree, from this measure up.  In your case, you cannot go up, you can only go down and down, it becomes incompatible  and there is a natural limit.  So that's nice.  That also makes the nice prediction that, and I think that literature partially recognizes  that this is a general, I mean, you need to see how measure phrases  are built in various languages, but whenever you can find something that  resemble what we just discussed, you find the same pattern. So it  means that it's not really related to something specific of the morphosyntax,  but it's really some general property of, on the one hand, the way these, you know,  inverse adjectives behave when they combine with the major phrase.  So that would be a very nice and elegant way.  So it's just a general beg and throw.  No, no, can I ask you, because that was something that was in my mind last night, because your  interest in adjectives goes back all the way back to when you were still at UCLA.  Do I remember correctly, you had a conversation with Terry  Parsons about this? Do I remember correctly? Only later.  Montague seems to, at a certain point, I don't want to mix things because  the paper which, it must be English as a formal language, where it says, you know,  I'm not dealing with this, but my student Hans Kamp and Terence Parson have  been talking, have been developing ideas.  Hello?  Yeah, Mr. Rai?  Hello?  Hello?  Hello? Ich glaube, es ist schon in Ordnung. Hallo?  Hallo?  Alles in Ordnung?  Okay. Yeah, go on. You were in the middle of something.

default: 0:07:46-0:07:47
 Oh, no, I was saying like I seem to remember that, and I think it's English as a formal

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:47-0:28:14
 language, there is a footnote in which atero makes reference to work that you've been  discussing, you and Terence Parsons have been developing, about something that is not going  to be treated in that paper. And I do believe that there was adjectives. Do I remember correctly?  Yeah, yeah. Absolutely. So as far as Terry Parsons is concerned, I don't think I was ever in touch with him directly  while I was at UCLA.  But Montague must have known of this work at least at the time when this paper was published.  I think that may actually have been after I left.  The paper was written in, I think, 1967. This is the paper that my input into was the  least insignificant. One of the things that I really did contribute was this idea that  in order to get a general theory of adjectives you would have to treat them as functions from NP meanings to other NP meanings, properties of properties. So that  also covers these cases of alleged and fake and so forth, and various kinds of adjectives that are subsective in the sense that a m entails n.  And so there is this footnote in there.  And when this was in 73,  what had been on my mind since I left, from the time I left UCLA was that I might be,  sorry and at that point it was already clear, well so say especially after 71, after Montague  had died, but even before I had the, the kind of contribution that any could make  to this general program of Montague grammar was to see how it could be extended to constructions  that sort of resisted the most straightforward elaboration. And vagueness was one of them. And then in 73, I actually wrote this paper that came  out in 75, it was a two-edged paper. And so there the question was asked, well, in many  cases these adjectives, all the subsective ones, even though there are big differences between them. It feels like  you really have here predicates that depend for the evaluation on context. And in those  cases where the predicates occurs predominantly, the noun that they proceed or are satellites of is the main factor  of the context that determines the comparison class as we will put it now.  That paper and this paper by Kit Fine, they were written independently, although we knew each other quite well at the time.  I remember sometimes getting together and asking each other what they were doing and  we found out that he had written that paper and I had written mine.  And then they both came out two years later, more or less at the same time, but they go  back to pretty much the same.  Anyway…  Can I ask you about this, about the genesis of this thinking that I brought you  to that paper?  In 1967, you and Montague went to Amsterdam to that conference, that workshop that the  Barry Lab organized.  I don't know how much you remember of it, but Stahl actually published the proceedings  and with quite a bit of the conversation that was going on.  One of the things that stayed in my mind is that Montague was very dismissive about almost  everybody, all the remarks, in particular people that were saying, how can you define  the notion of truth when it depends on context?  There was no problem. The only time he replies with an amount of seriousness  is when a very young dammit raises the issue of vagueness.  And he admits that vagueness is a serious issue.  He says, you know, at the moment I don't have an answer.  Professor Tarski told me that there are a couple of his students,  and I think he even mentioned a name or something,  that are working on it. But that's it. So it's the only time when you feel that Montague is really  feeling that an observation that has been made touches on a serious issue, an issue that he has  not an answer for. I wonder first of all if you were there when this kind of conversation happened  and if either you were really thinking about vagueness or this may have inspired you even  more to keep thinking about this as a serious issue when you start to develop a framework  of fully compositional analysis.  I doubt very much that at that point I had any idea about how to deal with vagueness.  I mean, yeah, okay, I was there when Moldin made the point and Nunn made the point for him.  And yes, that was a serious issue, but it did not become an issue until much later.  And I now don't remember exactly what triggered it, but so when I actually started writing the paper in 1973, but what I do know is I knew Dermot  reasonably well already since the time I had been in Amsterdam, so in the early 60s.  I didn't know him well, but that's the first time I met him.  It was a logical locum that he and John Crossley organised in Oxford in 63, I think it was  or 64. And then I mean I'd read a, well the main content of the paper, that was at a conference  in 1963 somewhere also in Windsor Park, there was some lodge that was actually very well attended.  So Hans, you said 1963, you went in 1970?  73, sorry.  No, no, because early 1963…  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  It's when the paper was really in your mind.  Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it was already more or less written. I can't remember exactly why it was left.  I was never very good at publishing. But so then in 1975 I gave a more mature version  of it at this huge conference that Kenyan organised in Cambridge.  Oh, the Kenyan conference, the one in England?  Yeah, yeah. It actually appeared in the proceedings.  In the proceedings.  That's why you're here now.  I understand.  Okay, I see.  Anyway, so in 1973, at this conference, they had Dummett as the one to preside over that.  It was not a session, it was just, I think, my talk. He was meant to  also apply to it. I was very impressed by how well he had understood what the whole  thing was. I also still remember, so one thing that I wouldn't endorse now anymore either either was to treat these vague predicates as context dependent and then try to reconstruct  the semantics of the comparatives of this structure of context dependence and of these vague predicates. So you can refine the context and then the gap, and  also the approximated linearity gets sharper and sharper. That's basically the idea.  And he said he did not actually believe in that, and thatcalled comparative was either the basis for all the constructors, including  the positive, or otherwise, I think this is roughly the way to put it, at least it was  independently grounded. And so that goes much more in the direction of this idea that these adjectives are fundamentally to place.  And that's very much in, so I'm finally coming back to what I'm doing here.  So there is this view that was around for a very long time and basically was sort of very generally accepted until  Chris Kennedy came about.  And actually even Kennedy can be seen as a confirmation of it and that's the view that if you  first just look at positives and comparatives of adjectives, they are  look at positives and comparatives of adjectives. They are basically of the same structure, but the only difference is that with the comparative you present the entity with which a comparison  is made explicitly through the then clause, whereas in the case of the positive, that second argument is implicit  and must be filled or interpreted as something like a standard or norm for the given adjective  in the given context given by the comparison class or something like that. And so I never did anything with this comment of Dummett at the time, but was full aware,  became even more aware of it, that he actually had thought about it as a very great deal before that. And when these two papers, Kitts and mine,  appeared in 75, his appeared in a special issue of Siddes which was entirely devoted  to Vakeness. And there was in particular one of Dumammert's outstanding papers, a paper by Dammert called Wung's  Paradox. It was the Chinese Ha the essence of the super-evaluation  theory. So, Dammert had that much longer, that paper went back to the 71 or 70 or something.  And I don't know, Kitt was much more closely, I mean they were both in Oxford, I think he  knew Darmot very much more.  I don't know to what extent his was really sort of based on Darmot's ideas, mine was  not really, I mean it was just much later.  But anyway, so Kitt's paper actually is in the spirit, it's also more logical and philosophical  than mine, I suppose, in the sense that mine has a very strong linguistic concern.  But so Kitt's paper, which is I think actually also very clear on the seminal contributions in this area, actually was much more, I felt, feel,  in the spirit of what Dummett was doing  and what he was thinking.  Anyway, so coming back to this idea that  is to some extent present also in the supervaluation approaches to the positives of adjectives,  that they are not that far away from the comparatives in so far as in both cases some kind of comparison made, that you also find in a document which I find more astounding each time you look  at it. That's a very long paper by Bierbusch on adjectives called The Semantics of gradation and it appeared in this is the book where it  appeared and this is the paper  is actually very good is another paper by by a lot there about dimensional  adjectives which is also so this is I mean, so this was the time it  came out in 89 but so it was still all written when Beowish was still locked up  more or less in the TDR and so he was one of, actually the only linguist there  that had direct contact with the West and especially with the  with the USA and so actually he was also left out well he had the luck of being  married to somebody who they could retain so as to make sure they would  come back but so he was actually let out already in the late 70s.  I think his first visit was to the Max Planck Institute in Nijmegen.  And then he was also part of a group of people  at the Behavioral Sciences Center in Stanford.  So they allowed him to travel all the way to the U.S.?  Yeah, and it was a great exception.  Oh, wow.  Yeah.  And he went back?  Yeah, yeah.  Well, his wife was there.  Oh, the wife was there.  And I thought, okay.  The wife didn't travel with him.  Oh, yeah.  There would be no question of that.  Okay, now I see. So this was a group that was actually in my career,  it's also played an important, really important part,  that was organized by Stan Peters.  And so it brought together philosophers and linguists and politicians. And so the main conception or idea was, it  was the academic year 81, 82, to bring to, or to focus on a kind of comparison between  situation semantics and DIT, which were both, yeah, I mean, from the last one  or two years and still.  And it wasn't a complete success in the sense that we had actually committed ourselves  to writing a book and it never happened.  And it was also, I think, that both sides somehow misconceived not only what the other  one's project was, but also what one's own was to some extent.  The two misconceptions were actually very important. So it led to what I later realised as a completely false kind of competition between the two.  So they're both concerned with partial information, but from a completely different point of view, I mean, this situation semantics, the point  of view is basically focused on ontology.  It's the models that are different, the classical models of Monte-Giogramma to be replaced by  these situations.  Nothing to do with the actual form and language.  And you can, I once wrote a paper that was more or less, I've never done anything with  it, you can actually develop a situation semantics for DIT just as well as you can develop the  classical model theory.  And then you see exactly what they have in common and what they don't have in common  and in what sense that can also be complementary.  So you wrote a paper on this?  Yeah, I can actually…  You might share.  It's not really finished, but most of it I think is probably readable.  And it might be a good occasion to try and sort of wind it up completely.  So anyway, that was an occasion where Stan had also invited Björk and I let him out  and he came not for the whole year but for about three months.  That's when I first met him.  So this paper was written after that so he had that kind of contact but  nevertheless I mean he was completely educated in the DDR and  largely ant-locked in there. It's absolutely amazing how much he managed to  develop out of his own abilities. And if you compare that, what everything has done in  there, the totality of what's done with what was subsequently done in mostly the US  or graded or scalar adjectives. There is so much that's sort of already seen quite clearly here  and quite a bit more too. It's a very long paper, it's about 200 papers.  So it's a monograph.  Yeah, yeah, and it's also dense because I see the font.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, there's a lot on one page.  Anyway, so in the end we made a decision, I still don't know whether it's final,  to write something by the three of us.  And, well actually, of the documents there, I've done all the writing.  And I'm not even sure to what extent.  He's been very nice about it, but it's now difficult to communicate with him because he's very deaf, so you can't...

SPEAKER_01: 0:28:14-0:28:15
 Well, you cannot talk.

SPEAKER_00: 0:28:15-1:02:58
 You cannot talk on the phone, and so Zoom is no good either.  And you can talk with him, and even then you notice that it's difficult  for him sometimes to process what you are saying when you speak very slowly  and face to face. So the last time that he and I met was when I was in Berlin in  June and a common friend Wolfgang Klein, so he very kindly offered his flat for us to meet.  And the time before that he came to Antje's little house and we sat in the garden.  So that works all right, but it's really the only way to communicate apart from writing  letters.  And so, I mean, actually this is one of the things I've been trying to deal with in the  last week or so. Part of what he's doing in this paper, Monograph, is also formulating a very abstract algebraic notion of scale. And  there you notice that that's not his cup of tea. I mean these are not very complicated  mathematical structures, but you have to be very careful what you're doing and it's just not up to scratch. And that sort of somewhat negatively infects also, not as badly as it could have been,  but still to some extent the applications of that to particular examples, German sentences common sentences with adjectives that the book is primarily concerned with.  One of the things that I discovered much later than when this idea had sort of come to me  that you could deal with this 20 cm short problem in the way I just described was that actually that  too is already in this document if you look at it the right way but it's  difficult to recognize just because there is a lot that sort of surrounds it  that isn't quite right and makes it very difficult to really appreciate the  insight. But he has this idea that one of the violations that are involved in  these 20 centimeter short cases is precisely that you land left of zero.  It's already there. Yeah, yeah. But it takes… Because Antje and I actually spent months, two years ago in the summer to go through  this whole thing.  And we thought we understood it and now I now realize that we didn't, only very partially.  But there was already considerable progress.  I mean I'd looked at it before.  So it's difficult to really appreciate all that's in there, and I think that's also the reason why it's been used in the literature far less than it deserves.  I mean people refer to it, especially Kennedy, in many places,  but one has the impression he hasn't really understood everything either.  And so what I've just been doing is actually trying to explain, and the idea is to send that to him also, exactly  how this semantic degradation actually deals with this particular problem, since that was  the thing that got this whole ball rolling. And so that's why I also somewhat critical, express myself somewhat critically, because  I've just been fighting all these things that make it so hard to understand what's  really going on there.  So that's, I did a bit of that.  Do you have an end line for that?  No, no.  I mean the time should not be too far where we can send this whole thing that we've  got off as a book manuscript.  And at the same time, I would very much like at least this one problem to be cast in a  form short enough to submit as a paper.  Yeah, I think it would be important because unfortunately you know that better than me.  Something that I noticed in our field, and probably it's not just our field, that if  you write a book, no matter how many wonderful ideas you have in that book, the circulation  of those ideas actually may be damaged by the fact that it's a book format.  Because one says, well, there is a 200-page book. 200 page book sure looks very interesting but I don't have time not  really I'll be put it there exactly and and then you know yeah and then there's  a next book that comes in pop of it well you have a 20 page paper so what let me  take a quick look and oh wow this is like let me check that yeah and  unfortunately and since things are getting even worse these days because  people are even busier there is more pressure and so on.  Unfortunately, I was discussing with Gennaro Kierke about this, he has exactly the same impression.  I mean, he loves books because they give him like space to develop ideas, but on the other hand, you realize that readers are even fewer.  And you can have like great ideas and then they get completely ignored. Or problematic  ideas that don't get discussed just because people say, well, in order for me to get to  chapter five, I need to read all the previous chapters. So I'm not doing it right now. And  then it never happens again. So I think it's a great idea, especially for this specific topic.  Can I ask you, in your initial thinking about adjectives, especially when you gave Montague  the suggestion of treating adjectives as functions, from non-phrases to non-phrases, in his, I assume  that was already in what he presented, he had a treatment of adverbs as functions from  verb phrases to verb phrases that in a certain way paralleled this treatment.  Now, do you remember in your conversation with Montague about this  treatment of adverts, if there was anything that either was directly or indirectly mentioned,  the work that I believe around the very same time Davidson was developing, because for  him adverts, certain kind of adverts were fundamental in order to push his agenda. What  is unclear to me are two things.  First of all, of course now we know the dates when papers are published, but that doesn't  necessarily mean the circulation of the paper or when people read the paper.  Have you ever heard Montague or do you remember Montague making reference to this kind of  approach where events play a role and you know. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I do remember quite clearly this must have been, I guess it was in 68,  there was a conference in Stanford that was organized, I think that was the time when Davidson was still at Stanford and it was  organized by him and Jill Harmon. It had a number of very famous people in there and  it led to this very thick proceedings called… What was it called? Something with semantics.  I know what you're talking about. I do have the proceedings in my office. I know what you're talking about.  I do have the proceedings in my office.  I know what you're referring to.  Anyway, so that's where in the proceedings, that's where the logical form of action  sentences first appeared.  And Davidson gave that paper at that conference. gyda'r cyfarfodau cyntaf. Roedd Davison wedi rhoi'r papur hwnnw ar y cyfarfod, ac rwy'n cofio  Roddy yn dod yn ôl ac yn dweud wrthym,  mae'r men Davison yma yn Stamford ac mae'n debyg ei fod yn eithaf da.  He brought some version of that paper with him, and I cannot much remember now whether that version was very different from the paper as it later appeared.  But anyway, that was when my attention was first drawn to Davidson.  It was actually the first time I really heard about Davidson. So I got that from him, and so his impression was very positive.  It is interesting though that, I mean that's probably just because  between then and when he died it was such a short period.  But looking back, I was actually very curious that in these  three papers on natural  language, so English as a formal language and universal grammar and PTQ,  there is virtually nothing about tense.  In PTQ, there is the operator H for the past tense, and that's about it, I think.  But I can't even remember now whether there's also something about the future.  But in any case, I mean, there's nothing about events as arguments of verbs.  And given that he already knew in 68 about this Davidson paper and appreciated it.  That he was so much interested, had been interested in tense, maybe also in aspects of some extent,  but certainly in tense and temporal reference from the time at least when Cocchiarello is starting his dissertation.  That I've always found curious and it may have, I don't know what could be behind  it, but maybe that changing to an architecture where verbs are systematically treated as having events or states as arguments  is something that really requires a lot of extra work.  And in PTQ that was not the focus anyway.  I can offer a key in that direction.  Because the conference you are referring to, the one that Davidson and Hartmann organized,  if I remember correctly, was in the spring of 1968.  Yeah, that sounds right.  So Montague was working on English as a formal language, finishing the paper, because he presented the paper in October in Italy at the conference, the big Olivetti conference.  The Olivetti conference, yeah. Now, who was in the session whose chair was Barry Lell?  The order of the speakers was the following, Davidson, Montague and Scott.  That was the sequence.  Davidson presented, the title of the paper was Semantics for Natural language based on truth or something along those lines,  then Montague presented English as a formal language and I don't remember, I mean,  Dana's presentation was not about natural language with some formal properties of  some symbolic system that could be used for natural language. So I made a huge effort,  because Olivetti  no longer exist anymore as such to try but I didn't know that and then I  confirmed that the conference was beautifully organized and they recorded  everything and then they send them the transcription of the recording and  that's where their, you know, the starting point of their papers was and a lot of you  tend to be, whenever I was able to find papers  that he delivered and then the written version, they tend to be very similar. So in other  words, when he presented a paper, the paper was already in his mind and including the  style of presentation. But there is an important difference though, and it's in the introduction.  In the introduction of the transcription, he starts a paragraph, I mean there's an entire paragraph at the beginning where he says, as he says in the paper, I find  myself in the unusual situation of being fully agreeing with the previous  speakers, Professor Davidson, about, you know, a theory of truth being important for  natural language semantics. Actually, rather than a theory of truth, we should be talking about a theory of logical  consequence.  This is really what we should be focusing on and what is missing from Professor Davidson's  presentation.  Then he goes on with his paper.  I think that's a key.  It's certainly a trick to something.  I think there is a key.  I wonder if Montague, in what he knew about the system that Davidson  was developing based on what he had read before and what he had just presented, could see,  and given what I've heard about him and how quick he was in understanding people's ideas and going  through it, could see that there is no easy way in the system that Davidson was  building to give the kind of account of the notion of logical consequence that would be  satisfactory for Montague standards.  In fact, I don't think that Davidson ever addressed that issue, at least in any of the  work that I know of.  But for Montague, I think this is really true,  because if you pay attention and read Montague,  even when he talks about truth, what he really cares is not truth,  in the sense that you can relativize the notion of truth,  and that's what he tells us, what he shows us,  his real obsession in terms of what is crucial,  without which you cannot have a theory of semantics for natural languages,  the fact that you're able to capture  the logical consequence.  And for him, as soon as you see a theory that is not doing that, I think that the interest  of that theory diminishes.  Actually, he considers that problematic.  And so that remark, which was diplomatically cut off from the printed paper, is there in  a very clear way. I mean, most of it is differential towards Davidson.  He respects him, clearly.  Otherwise, he would have used a different tone.  But that's as harsh as it can get towards somebody who just spoke before him,  who was already a name, well-established and well-respected  in a certain environment.  He was, at that time time a professor at Stanford,  where there was a bunch of his friends.  So there was all this, but the choice of his words  is very careful, but it's clear that he's basically saying,  you're missing the crucial point.  That's what he's basically saying.  At least two things, what you're saying,  that I think are entirely right.  First, that this aim that is semantics for natural  language has as its first task to give a viable explication to the notion of consequence.  That is why you want to do model theory, not just have one model, but a class of models so that you meaningfully  define logical consequences as preservation of truth in all those models. That's absolutely  right. I remember him saying things to exactly that effect to me. And in his days, when Montague grammar was created, this was a much less problematic  stance than it is now. Because what the models were like, that was just like predicate logic.  So there was no sort of engineering aspect to that and nowadays with all these  different properties of different lexical items and so forth, the real problem is really the ontology  that largely manifests itself in the models. So yeah, so as far as that's concerned, is absolutely right. His view of what one had to do was to get a full definition of  logical consequences that could check against our intuitions of which natural language sentences  follow from which others. So that's one thing. The other thing is that that wasn't visible yet, I think not to  him and certainly not just from this paper, the logical form of action sentences. At the  time, I'm talking 68 now, and I can't say anything about this period between 68 and when Montague died. But so Davidson really had this notion  of a theory of semantics has to be a theory of truth, not truth conditions, but truth.  And that whole camp that developed in particular in Oxford, of all these young people like Evans and McDowell  and so forth, on the basis of the fact that he, at the same time as Quine, spent a year  in Oxford, that must have been something like, I don't know, 69, 70 or so, or 70, 71.  I think it's more likely it would have been 1691, we can't verify  that. But so the two of them had an enormous impact in Oxford because all these very smart,  very young people, yeah, Peacock was another one, Davies, anyway. So they felt that this ordinary language philosophy that had been practiced in Oxford was really  a dead end.  Ryle and Strawson and Hart. And so they really sort of, yeah, flogged to this new perspective that was presented  by Quine, but even more clearly by Davidson.  And so that actually created this big gap within the community between those truth theorists and the moral theorists,  or sort of a structure at Montague and Bama. And so I don't know anything  because that could have been only later about Montague perceiving this development in Oxford, he could just have done so.  And his reaction to it, which I am sure would have been negative if he had been aware of  it.  Or maybe what he was reacting to, without seeing the difficulty of that approach, was  reacting to the fact that, and I was able  to check that, what Davidson does, as we expect in the 1968 paper, he talks about the foundation  of the theory of semantics for natural language on the notion of truth. That's what he does.  And so there's nowhere any kind of hint, direct or indirect suggestion that he cares and he has an  idea of how to handle the notion of logical consequence. So for Montague that  would have been enough to look at this and say... and there is no obvious  way of doing it. It's not like even if it's not there you can easily imagine how you  do it. And so maybe that was what triggered the reaction of like, well,  maybe we should focus...  Because that incipit, that the beginning is really ending, like, it's really saying, this  is the central point and this is completely absent from the paper.  It's not saying you cannot handle it, it does not say this, but it says, you know, maybe  Professor Davidson should have focused on the notion of logical concept, which I  consider at the center of any enterprise in the semantics of the language.  So it's quite possible, of course, that you're talking about 69 now.  68.  So that was fall 68 when the two of them presented together one after the other. Which is like the event that you, the workshop that you're  describing, that you're talking about, I'm going to go and check all the information.  I think it was organized at Stanford in the spring.  Yeah, that sounds right. Because otherwise, I mean, he told me that.  We were not there anymore. You're right. So the semester I was there. I think that he got the first idea of what it was like, of Davidson, who he was, what  he was up to, and then he hears again a presentation right before his talk.  I think that feels like something that he had not planned to have, so he had not written  in the paper, but it was a natural reaction to what he just heard. Yeah, yeah. And the speculation I just wanted to express was that  Davis may in fact have presented at this talk in particular what he was saying about these action  sentences as an example of how a theory of truth for natural language had to be formulated.  Moreover, if the paper that he gave is like the paper that was published, there again  you have no interface between the natural language with its syntax and these formulas. The only argument of Davidson  is if you want to get these inferences right from John buttered a piece of toast in the  bathroom with a knife to he buttered a piece of toast, then if you want to explain that  in predicate logic terms, then you have to form these long conjunctions. And how do  you do that? Well, by saying these sentences talk about particular events and then these  different properties of these events that they can just be strung together as conjunctions,  and then the interest is just with conjunction reduction. And I could well imagine that that would have rubbed  Richard the wrong way because this is precisely his point that in the text…  The textbook, yes. How do we… what's happening? How do we teach…  How do we get to these critical…  What's the algorithm that allows you to do that you just  rely on your intuition yeah and that's the failure of like you know yeah i can totally see that so  it would be interesting to um well actually it's really interesting what we have because it really  shows on the one hand some very strong guiding principles that he had in building uh his approach  strong guiding principles that he had in building his approach to natural language and the semantics of natural language. On the one hand, an explicit full compositionality of the theory that he was  developing, and second, the central notion of logical consequence. So these are two very  important guidelines. And also, I believe, correct me if I'm wrong, but these are also...  So these are two very important guidelines. And also, I believe, correct me if I'm wrong,  these are also, last night you asked me,  we should talk about intellectual import  and some of the intellectual contribution.  To me, these are two points that I always keep in my mind  whenever I read his work that I would like to highlight  for the readers, because I think there are ways  of presenting them to a variety of audience  and bring to the attention  to the fact that from a certain point of view he was the first one to formulate them in this way.  So the fact that the notion of logical consequence is central to account for how human languages work in terms of meaning,  I would say it definitely is. In the sense that sure, logicians would use that notion and sometimes they would also apply when they would do their own, like,  you know, they would bring a little chunk of natural language and say, and this entails this, fine.  But that was more because to bring the point home. It was not because they thought that their notion was really central in how you build a theory of the meaning of national language. And the other thing is, sure,  and that also brings us to the issue of De De Lewis and then Kratzer and others, sure, you know, like  Frege is the one that told us about compositionality and so on, but there is a difference between  aiming at compositionality and realizing compositionality.  I think part of the tremendous appeal that Montague's idea had among various groups of  people was because there was a research program there that was fully explicit.  As you said, with lots of, how do you do this, how do you do that, but the fact that you  could even ask, how do you do the semantics of questions? How do you do the semantics of plurals? What about the  semantics of maths, plural quantification? And so adjectives is because the framework was set in  such a way that it made it clear what you had to do, except that you need to develop how compatible  it is, what you need to change in it, because it was fully explicit. And to me this is a precious  feature of a research program. And also like I think somehow Montague had this,  I don't know how clear it was to him, the idea that in that moment that was crucially needed  in order to foster investigations. Absolutely.  It's only by doing this as explicit as you can.  This is my syntax, this is my semantics, this is my mapping.  I can get direct interpretation, I can get indirect interpretation.  These are two different methodologies. In the end, they are equivalent, but you can choose one.  And now let me tell you, let me get my hands dirty and show you how I go through relative  clauses, how I go through predicates of various kinds.  To me that's fundamental in order to inspire, I mean to get results and to inspire.  I completely agree.  And this statement that you find in more than one paper that, in my  opinion, there is no difference between natural languages and the formal languages, artificial  languages of formal logic. I mean, in a way I could describe my own intellectual progress  as one in which it becomes increasingly clear that that's not true.  Nevertheless, it was the right thing to say at the time.  Because it pushed people to see how much that's true and to discover many layers of formal  properties that natural language has. It's usually, it's only when you start getting, using certain lens  that you can see how much you can see and how much you cannot see, and then you decide to change  the lens. But if you don't even have a pair of lens to begin with, then  it's just fog and nothing is on focus.  And so I fully agree, like it's the push  to get as close as possible to a certain formal system  and investigate certain formal properties that allows you to discover how much of the  formal properties are actually found in natural language and how much is not.  So in this sense, I think it's another reason why the program, I mean one of the merits  of the program, not because it told us everything,  the program told us everything about natural language, or necessarily gave us the only framework to work with.  It was at the very beginning, first of all. So when you're at the beginning, you suggest and then you see how far it goes.  But without that, I think it would have been much harder to raise issues, to see things  in a certain way, to discover things that don't work in a certain way, because you were  investigating them in that way.  And this is something that these days gets me perhaps even more angry than it did in the past, that so much of the work on semantics,  both in philosophy of language in the US in particular, and in linguistics, is sort of  talking about particular constructions very locally, and with a little bit of formalism and sort of vaguely presupposes Heim and Kratzer and nothing is, well very rarely I mean very  often, nothing is ever worked out, not a single example. And if you don't do that  there are lots of things you just don't see. And this has become really a standard. I think in particular  in philosophy this is a more special case of a more general phenomenon I've seen.  So when I finished, there was at that time a nascent and growing awareness that logic was important to philosophy.  And so departments, like I told you, I was hired.  Departments and good departments sort of became aware that one should get people who knew  their way about that. And there were lots of papers on any  aspect of philosophy that showed and presupposed this kind of technical ability. And that's  very largely disappeared. And in philosophy of language, there are many things that are on my interest  agenda. And there seems to have been a change in some of the… there is a new generation  of people in philosophy that really know their way around, but it's still a minority. And  in other branches of philosophy, it's actually curiously changed in where formal  precision is really essential. I mean one is social choice and another  increasingly is an epistemology.  Good morning. Sorry, I hope we did not disturb you with all our talking.  No, no, no. Aren't you doing exercises?  And so what you're describing as a change, I wonder also if it was essentially Montague's concern,  and maybe at a certain point more than just a concern,  sadness, that he observed in his own department.  Because I believe that what you're describing was also Montague's view of what a philosophy  department should be.  And he understood that when he first moved there, he and Kilish were the young guys,  the logicians, the others were the old generation.  So you need to give time for these people to hire retired or be able to hire new people  that had the right kind of  background.  Then when finally the two of them acquire a certain kind of power because Kalish in  1965 becomes chair and Montague in 1964, Kalish becomes chair and Montague becomes director  of graduate studies, now you feel that it's time to shift the department in a certain way. And then when they start going  through these searches and progressively realizes that people that don't have that kind of background  are hired, like when there was a search for somebody working on ethics, I think maybe  it was around the time when you were finished, in, I believe. Or maybe 1967, I think.  So, where Montague, there is a letter that he writes to the faculty where he makes a  clear point, even to the dean, to protest the final decision.  No, it was not a protest.  There was a first letter where he says, you know, there are various candidates that have  like a background in ethics and also a background in logic.  Prior was the one who suggested, you know, he wrote this, but it's and also a background in logic. Prior was the one  who suggested, you know, he wrote this, but he's definitely somebody who knows his logic.  Sobel was another example.  Sobel, exactly. And I think what he started realizing is that there was opposition,  not just from the people that he would expect opposition from, but also from Kehlich. And again,  that felt not just in that case a betrayal, like he didn't just feel  betrayed by his own friend, but also betrayed on what he thought would be their common intellectual  enterprise. So to bring philosophy to a different level, that would make the department a different  department and that would bring the whole enterprise and that would form students and  graduate students in a certain way. But must however also say that the department had a tradition that goes back much further  after all.  They hired Reichenbach.  They hired…  Yeah, one thing though, I was able to talk to Hilary Patten before he died.  They were kind enough to invite me to his place because you know, Hilary's wife, Anna  Ruth Meadors, was a student in UCLA department and she became the first female faculty member  of the philosophy department.  I didn't know that.  Yeah.  And she told me this.  She was very generous despite being very sick that day.  I mean, she was very sick and that day she put all the energy that she could to talk.  She's not alive anymore.  No. She died after like she had a degenerative disease that progressively impaired  her like at the time she was not able to walk anymore. She was able to speak but she had  to make an effort to articulate things. But well on the other hand, Hilary was there taking care of her.  He was still alive too.  Yeah, I went to their place.  One of my heroes opens the door and says, please come in, Ivano.

default: 1:02:58-1:03:01
 I was not expecting to see him.

SPEAKER_00: 1:03:01-1:41:19
 I was like, what do I do?  I feel like a partner in front of me. It was very nice.  The wife was already there, so we introduced each other.  The entire time he was there behind her, let her talk, bring in some water sometimes,  the things that she needed.  Then at a certain point, it was her that encouraged him to talk, like turning her head.  Because we were talking about the UCLA department.  That's when she said, well, this was my time when Richard was there too. So, she became a professor, I believe, so  Richard was in January 1955. She became a professor in 1957. And so, she said, you know…  Was Hilary still a student at that time? No, they met later.  Ah, I see.  They met later.  And so when we were talking about, oh, what's your impression, because Hilary left UCLA  in 1952 and Reichenbach's down in 1953.  Yeah, yeah.  So Hannah had just arrived.  So when Hilary left, Hannah arrived as a student.  She finished and they hired her as a lecturer first and then they gave her the tenure track  position, the first woman to do so.  She said, I was the only woman and there was this tradition on Friday afternoon for faculty  to go to a bar for a drink.  But a single woman to a bar in LA those days was not a thing that was good for your reputation.  So I knew Richard well, he knew me well, and I knew that he was gay.  He said, why don't we go there as a couple?  So we solved the problem.  I very much appreciated that because it allowed me to.  So he had lots of other handiwork.  So when I said, look, what about UCLA Theological Department before Richard arrived because  you were there, she turned towards Hillary and asked Hillary to talk.  What Hillary told me is that his only reason to go to UCLA was 1948 when he went as a graduate  student was because of Reichenbach.  He said, I wanted to study with Reichenbach.  I knew that everybody else, and when I went there, I got the confirmation, was not at  that level. So the UCLA department that is with the presence of  a lot like you know the Carnot department, the Montague department, the Kaplan department,  that was later. But at that time Reichenbach was the only figure that I could interact with  about that. It was a very heavy, on the one hand, historical approach to philosophy,  and then some of the American pragmatism, but that was the UCLA philosophy.  Yeah, okay, there was this tradition. Moody was an example of that, I guess. But I mean,  they hired Russell in the 40s. What's that, for a year?  Bradford Russell? year. At UCLA?  Yeah.  I can't remember exactly when it was.  It wasn't long.  It was after Russell left Britain.  Well, he had an appointment in New York.  Yeah.  Then it got poorly because of the…  It was at that time, yeah. He had an appointment in New York, but then it got poorly because of the…  It was at that time, yeah.  I don't know the details actually.  He was there, I mean, yeah, because he was… did he actually emigrate because he refused  to… there was no longer the draft saying like in the First World War.  I can't remember exactly why he left Britain at that time.  From what I remember, there were a couple of issues that he had.  One was his pacifist stance, and the second, there was that issue related to the school  that he created with, I think, the person  that was at that time his wife or his father.  Second wife, yeah.  Yeah.  And the kind of pedagogical approaches that they had.  I see.  And we were coming from the Victorian time and the Edwardian time was not much better.  And there was a complete violation of one of the crucial like code of England  which is you educate the youth, the important youth in a certain way.  Yeah, yeah.  I think there was some…  Separation of girls and boys.  Yes, exactly.  Not there.  There was no separation and then I think somebody came with a scandalous thing,  oh they are naked together, something like that.  So it was a major scandal and…  So that made him…  At least from what I read from the biography it sounds like.  He was apparently financially very badly off at the time, after having given away everything  he had at an earlier stage.  And so apparently this book, The History of Western Philosophy, was also something he  took on because he needed the money.  Yeah, yeah.  Anyway, I thought he was there also. Somebody must have hired him. Also, I mean,  this was all before my time, but not all this, not all that much. Abraham Robinson was in  the philosophy department, or half-half.  I think it was half-half. And I think the driving force for what I understood was mathematics.  Could well be.  Yeah. What they managed to do is they piggybacked on mathematics to say,  let's give him a joint appointment.  Still, I mean, they did that.  No, because that happened when there was already… I think it was the time when  Montague and Kalish were still interacting and acting as a unit.  Oh yeah, surely.  It was always in the first half of the 60s, I think, or the mid 60s.  No, I think it was in the first half.  Robertson was already gone when I…  Yeah, because he left relatively soon.  And he left because in fact he was sort of persecuted by Montague and C.C. Chang, I think, who thought that it was all far too imprecise  was what Robinson was doing. So actually that, so Robinson then went to Yale.  Yeah, yeah.  And so what I heard, I mean actually Montague told me personally that he thought that it  was just all too fluffy.  And so he, when I think it was in his very early years, I don't know exactly when this  all played out.  So Robinson I think as you say left the early 60s, like 61 or 62, and according to  Montague it was because he couldn't stand these young guys.  Well, I can imagine that style.  So the relentlessness of those two people, I can well imagine that he felt his life was  made impossible or very unpleasant.  To what extent that was important, I don't know. I mean in those days, I think even now,  going from pretty much anywhere to the mathematics department in Yale would be felt as a promotion.  And so talking about this kind of presence, maybe if you don't mind,  we would like to go to the second big area of our discussion today, like you know, academics that  come and go. Something that would be very important for various reasons, and if you're interested I  might be able to explain them a little, but first I want to hear what you know directly and indirectly about  David Lewis' presence at UCLA and in particular his interaction definitely at the intellectual level,  if you know anything also about the personal interaction with Montague.  You can easily imagine why this is important from the intellectual point of view. We have two  have two bright minds that around the same time work on similar issues. And at the same time I think it's also also given the position some of the opinions  that have been expressed by people in the field recently about reconstructing  the history and a very strong attempt to completely downplay  Montague's role by basically saying of all that what he said either was already present  in work by Church and others or he was actually seen and presented in a much better way in  work by David Lewis, I think this issue should become even more important.  And what I'm referring to  are some recent things by Angelika Kratzer on how…  Yeah, I mean that's completely wrong. And I mean not only that it ludicrously underplays  the role that Montague played, but also, I mean as far as David Lewis is concerned, you can actually see it in the work. I mean  compare convention with general semantics. These are two different worlds. I mean they're both important worlds and he's rightly held in great esteem for each of them.  But general semantics is what he wrote and could only have written after he came to UCLA.  And I mean, it wasn't recorded. I actually knew both him and Steffi quite well.  Steffi actually, I helped through her logic prelims.  I think it's true because she was a graduate student at the time.  Yeah, yeah.  They came together.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  She was a student.  So Steffi, I actually knew quite closely, it's too much.  And so I knew David also, but he's not that easy to get to know.  So then the year, I mentioned that, the year from 1771, when I was in Amsterdam, I quite  often stayed with them.  On one occasion I remember him saying about convention, that's a silly book.  I didn't pursue that.  I mean actually I had only part of it.  I knew what the line was. My reconstruction, I should have perhaps asked them, why do you say that,  I didn't feel called on or confident enough to do so, but my reconstruction was that there is  nothing about the compositional aspects of language in there. And that you could do Montague grammar the way that Montague did, I think was absolutely  central to his development.  And I don't know how much emphasis he himself has put that in talking to other people because  after all his line in the end is quite different and the qualities of  general semantics precisely where it goes beyond the details of Montague  Grammar is also very important and then that became his own world but now much  more in the spirit of doing the kind of thing that Montague did. Something that, well,  he might have discovered all this on his own,  he's being as smart as he is,  but in fact it was his presence at UCLA at the time,  and his participating in seminars that Montague gave and so forth,  that historically is very clearly the source of this.  I mean, in my interaction with Angelica, I asked her if she had a copy of David's  dissertation, because convention, the book, is heavily based on the dissertation of David  Blountieu.  Yes, it is really so.  But crucial in all the last chapter.  If you compare, what you notice is the font.  So the last chapter in the book is where he starts elaborating on natural language.  He starts getting some ideas.  Now notice that when he writes, because I went to check the timing,  I went to checking his archive.  So that, the book came out in 1968.  And that chapter was the last one to be written,  between the end of 67 and the end of 1967.  I see, I see.  Right.  So he had already been one year at UCLA talking to Montague and attending his courses.  And you start seeing that while the last chapter of the dissertation was about natural language,  but first of all, way smaller.  We're talking about, I think it was less  than 10 pages to begin with. And well, in the book it's 30 pages. But crucially, it's the approach.  So the last chapter feels like Quine forcing him to say something about natural language that  quotes Quine. In fact, it's all Quine. I see.  Quine, in Quine, blah, blah, in Quine, 1960, like the claim.  And it's the Quine style.  So you take some expression from natural language, you elaborate a little bit.  It really feels, with respect to the rest of the book, there's nothing coming from Lewis.  He was forced to put it there.  There is nothing new, nothing original, nothing inspired.  Two years later, when now the book, that's turned into a book, now you start feeling  like, okay, clearly, first of all, he has changed his frame to talk about natural language.  And he clearly is elaborating some ideas.  That's not Quine anymore.  And then general semantics can perceive almost like the continuation of that now that it  has on the one hand all the picture very clear in mind, the tools developed in the meantime.  For example, generalized quantifiers were introduced by Montague and crucially played  a role in the framework that Lewis develops as well and so on.  So based on this evidence, I don't see how you can deny, and the fact that we know and we  have witnesses like Barbara, that David was attending Lewis' courses.  Very likely the two of them were talking to each other.  Like Montague wrote letters about Lewis.  Was very well aware of who Lewis was and what he was doing.  There was all that discussion when Lewis got the offer from Princeton  of like what do we do with Lewis. He was an assistant professor and Princeton offered him tenure and so there was discussion within the department do we offer him like associate  professor with tenure or we go for full professor and so there was a discussion based on the level  of the work and you know Montague his position was we offered him associate professor with tenure  because that's what he has done so far and so you know it's not somebody like I don't know who this  guy is and clearly they know each other and it's nothing when I interviewed her she confirmed that  you know they knew each other they were interacting quite a bit and and so and it sounds like  you can confirm that that you know clearly there was a strong interaction between  the two.  Oh yeah.  So Barbara's testimony is from later than mine.  So I saw Barbara only once during the entire time I was at UCLA and that was at a logical locum in the spring of 68 where she had been  invited to give a talk. It was about negations, I remember, I can't remember the details.  I knew that this person existed in the linguistics department, she had a really big reputation very early on. But I'd never seen, I hadn't  read any of her stuff, I mean it wasn't the sort of thing I would have read at that  point, it was all John Skeen syntax. And I had never seen her. And I didn't see her again that remaining time I was there.  It's only at this famous summer school of the ASL in Amherst where she sat in on the  course that I gave.  1973, is that correct? Yeah.  Because they just celebrated the 50th anniversary of the new LSA.  And there are these beautiful pictures of many of you guys on the meadow, like being  there hanging out.  I see.  It was a lovely time and it was very productive also. thing. But yeah, so mutual knowledge, knowing each other is actually from then. And then  we actually saw each other quite often because for one thing, we were for many, many years,  we were always invited as speakers to this, what's now the Amsterdam Colloquium, in that time it was still called the Montague Colloquium.  And then eventually I got a job at UMass, where we overlapped at least for a little  while. My knowledge of Lewis at UCLA sort of went from when he came until I left, which was  two years later.  He came in 1966.  He came in 1966, 1967, 67, 68. And then actually after that, through this meeting, living with  somebody or staying with somebody, it was only a few days each time, but still it made still, there is a very big difference.  So that he and Montague knew each other very well and that there was a mutual appreciation,  I had not all that sort of hands-on evidence for, but it was clearly the case. Nevertheless, I understood them as both concerned,  actually, with very much the same project,  even though general semantics,  and that's the one paper that I remember from that time  that's about language, is different in a sort of general tenor and  FRL assets. It's about close conditions of sentences in natural languages. And  Lewis, this is something I learned much later from Barbara, or from one of these  things she has written about the history of early history of semantics. That actually David knew a lot about syntax even before he came to UCLA.  That was something I didn't know.  And it sort of went back even to the time when they were both,  I think they were even at this equally old, but they were both at Swarthmore.  Yes, and that's where they met.  And then for graduate school, I believe David was one year younger than Barbara.  That sounds right.  And they were both extremely precautious. And so then they moved, maybe with one year of difference, they both moved to Cambridge.  I mean, to one Harvard and the other MIT, but she was telling me that David was coming to Chomsky's lectures.  And that's probably where his knowledge of generative grammar, and then they were  very close, they were talking, they, you know, they shared this interest.  And so probably by the time he comes to, um, to also that's the other reason why  when Angelica cites from a letter that Lewis, I believe this is a letter that  Lewis wrote to Barbara, uh, where he compl Barbara where he complains about Montague bothering  him with understanding what Chomsky is saying, I don't know if it was aspects or something,  and I keep telling him or I don't know how to explain this to him. You need to be very  careful because these are private letters written by one friend to another.  And you can easily go into that modality of emphasis, caricature. That is fine when you're writing privately among friends.  That doesn't necessarily mirror the reality.  The fact that Montague wouldn't be able to understand transformational grammar  sounds to me like it makes no sense.  Maybe what he said, you know, maybe Montague was complaining  that this did not make sense.  That's a different story.  But you know, I'm expecting somebody like Lewis to be able to make those distinctions.  So from there, you cannot build the conclusion, oh see, Montague didn't even  know generative grammar while in generative semantics, we already have the use.  And that's why his syntax is so poor and so miserable, versus  Lewis that uses as much more knowledge about syntax, like, what are we trying to do here?  So that's, I find, very poor, let's say, that historical reconstruction that misses  the crucial points of what, first of all, what is relevant and what is the background  of the people that are involved.  I mean, as far as this thesis of Angelika Eskincit, I was actually pretty annoyed when  I heard about it.  I mean, really, did she and I know each other well enough?  She knows enough about me.  She also knows that I'm one of the few people who are actually there.  She never even bothered to contact me about it. Wow, I mean because clearly you would be one of the few people to be able to say, look,  it's not how it went.  Yeah, I mean, yeah, I don't, yeah, so I was very annoyed, but we have not had time  since then. I can remember when I once asked a question to a,  not from person to person, I haven't seen her for quite a while now,  but I think I may have asked a question.  There was a, this is now three years ago, I think,  there was a meeting of Z and Bedoytung in London.  Are you talking about the one online?  Because she gave an interview online to celebrate, I think, what kind of anniversary?  Fifty years of Sinn and Bedoytung.  Yes, but where she gave some kind of interview on the history of semantics online? Or you  are talking about an event in person?  The occasion that I think of, they had for that meeting of Siden Bedeutung in London,  I think it was, I can't remember, it was either UCL or King's College of Organizations.  Because she was on sabbatical there, yes, she was visiting.  Yeah, that actually, this was all on Zoom.  So I invited four people. So I was the first, Barbara was the second,  Martin Stockhoff was the third, and she was the fourth. And I think on that occasion this came up again.  But nothing got resolved.  One thing that I feel will be… because she sent me that material.  Also she sent me and Barbara at the same time that material.  Before she actually came out with it, you  mean? Yeah, so well right after she gave the presentation at the David Lewis conference,  because that material was first presented at the conference that was organized in England  to celebrate, sorry, I don't remember which anniversary related to David Lewis, probably was…  Oh yeah, that is a different occasion from the one that I'm talking about. Yeah, I know that.  I think it was 2021, I believe, the 20th anniversary of the W.E.  Steph.  There are two different occasions.  There was before this InnoVe talk, the occasion you were talking about, and there was the  first time she presented in a talk.  There was a recording, so I saw both the recordings when she was leaving  and then she shared the slides that she used and that's where she made the strongest of  her positions.  Just to give you an idea, we're talking about basically the same.  First of all, it was the Lewis that came up with the idea of generalized quantifiers and  that's the evidence.  Second, Montague, intentionalities, indices, this was already in, and natural  language being basically no different from symbolic language, this is already in a Losser  Church paper in 1937, and there is a quote, okay? Then I went to check the paper. It's  completely misleading, because what Church was suggesting is that there can be formal  properties, but many people  have observed that some formal properties of artificial languages may be found in natural  languages.  But that's a very different position from saying that you cannot count them to begin  with.  And the indices he talks about are something completely different.  And that really made me very suspicious.  And not just that, but the talk was really a demolishing attack towards not just Montague,  but also the traditional Kmartan logic, in particular in Barbara. really a demolishing attack towards not just Montague, but also  the traditional Kemarimo, in particular Barbara.  It was a personal attack towards Barbara.  How strange.  I mean, almost like a never-ending necessity to kill somebody that she had already killed  decades ago.  I mean, Barbara was completely removed in terms of power from the department.  The dynamics within the department once Angelica took over were indisputable.  I mean, so why do you need to do this?  I would understand if it was the opposite side doing that as a later revenge, but Barbar  would never do anything like that.  It's not in her nature to begin with.  Why…  That is an aspect I actually don't even perceive, the whole thing.  So after that I felt first of all very bad for Barbara and then as somebody who  is trying to reconstruct, as in a story I'm like, this is not faithful to the facts.  And that's when I asked, Angelica, have you ever seen the W. Lewis dissertation?  Not the book, the dissertation, because I do have it.  If you want I can share it with you.  And in my reply I say, look, Angelica, because I do have it. If you want, I can share it with you. And in my reply, I say, look, Angelica,  these are the facts.  This is when Montague is developing these ideas.  These are the seminars.  We know these are facts.  Look, this is the card in Montague's archive  that shows that those two, they are like David Lewis  attending the seminar, Barbara Berti attending the seminar.  This is 1967.  OK?  And so this is what happened. So this is the seminar that would produce English as a formal  language. So it was fall 19... 69 it must have been. No, no, sorry, fall 1968. Sorry. Montague was  working on the presentation of English as a formal language. He would give the presentation at the  end of October in Milan. The seminar started in September.  That paper was already pretty much completed.  The paper already existed. He was presenting this to them. But also, there is evidence that David  Lewis was attending previous seminars by Montague because in the previous year, in fall 1967, Montague offered a seminar, I think, that was under the label of mathematical logic or something like that.  But crucially, if you look at the content of the seminar, he was doing exactly what he wanted to do,  that is, applying logic to a variety of philosophical issues.  And, number one, for the first time, he label of Mathematical Linguistics, okay?  Mathematical Linguistics.  And second, advertising the linguistics department and what does he want to discuss among various  things?  Word and object and aspects.  And that's the seminar when Lewis presents, in particular he presents on counterfactuals  because they discuss…  So that's the seminar that I was…  Oh, you were in this too.  Okay.  And my recollection of it is somewhat different from what you're just saying.  I think it was called Pragmatics and there were a account of dates in tense logic as operators.  So it was an extension of priori in tense logic.  And Lewis presented there for the first time his theory of counterfactuals. However, Sobel presented his theory of counterfactuals, which is a little different, but has very  close ties to David's.  And I can't remember whether they…  I think they were aware of that beforehand.  Now, those are the three presentations that I remember, but it took the form of different people presenting stuff.  And Montague himself must also have presented something about, for him pragmatics at that  time was pragmatics of natural language. It was just I and you and I think I may also have presented something out on now as a tensile operator.  I don't know more, but it doesn't quite fit the description that you just gave of  it.  There may be another one.  You know that I reconstructed the entire teaching on Montague with his colleagues. So I have a table in front of me. So that year in fall 1967,  he offers, well, the usual Phil 31, which is the logic first course, but at the graduate level,  he teaches 260, which is the seminar of mathematical philosophy. And it was on Tuesday  from three to six. So from the syllabus that I have, it looks more like, that's a note  that I wrote to myself, it looks more like a philosophy of language seminar. There is  a discussion with Lewis on conditionals, at least that's something, he kept some of the  material that was presented there. And in winter, so right after, almost as if it's  the second part…  Well, that's the time that we had quarters already.  Yes, that's the time with quarters.  That's the year with quarters.  I think this is, let's see, it's the first year or the second year.  It's the second year.  The change happened in 66-67 and in 67-68 is the second year when you had quarters.  Right after, in winter 1968, he teaches again, 260, Mathematical Philosophy.  There seems to be a follow-up, like a continuation  of the course.  I see.  And that's the course in which what is presented is something that, you know,  better than being Montague style, students have to take notes and then if you would check  the notes and then the one that were approved would circulate and my understanding is that every week there would be a different person  doing that.  So in those notes that he kept, taken by somebody who had a beautiful semi-Gothic handwriting,  you see the appearance of what is called Professor Montague's grammar.  That's where you present that English is a formal language system. So you have the  Andriukhevich category of grammar, you have the system of the syntax, and you start getting  the semantics and the list of construction that you want to deal with.  I don't have any clear recollection of that, but I'm sure I must have been there.  I mean, it was a paper that I knew quite well already at that point.  So you were, according to my records, because I also tried to look at what the people near  Montavie were doing based on the teaching.  So according to my records, they are not complete, but you were teaching a course in spring 1968 so the following when  modern was not teaching you were teaching uh i have you down actually for two courses it's  possible you were teaching two different things so one is a lot um field 32 which i think was  the second step of logic and and you also were down for 133 logic, which was the third in the  semester. Is that possible?  Yeah, I didn't remember there were these two, but I do remember having in the same  semester, but I do remember having taught from the K. H. Montague book. And this 133, that was much more sort of meta-theory.  That was the one that was also used to prepare graduate students for the logic part of the  prelims.  I think that's where I also had Steffi Lewis.  Okay, so because that was…  That course I do remember. And the other one I actually remember too,  I didn't know they were in the same semester.  I mean, I was paid as a lecturer that last semester.  Oh, okay.  Last quarter. Now I understand because,  and probably as a lecturer they may,  if the records are correct,  remember the records, what happens is that I had access to what I think they are,  the official records,  that is, they would publish these books with all the courses printed out with instructors,  but of course they had to be published months ahead, and then you had to make corrections.  So I was then in the UCLA kept the official archive.  I guess there was an office that was centralized that would take care of all the teaching,  and when there were changes to the teaching, you would have to inform the office.  UCLA kept those with the handwritten changes.  I see.  And that's where I said, because what they were doing, they would first of all  change the name. Sometimes the name of the instructors would be changed or would be added  because it was not available before. And the other thing that they would add by hand would  be the number of students enrolled. So that's why I know sometimes, for example,  I know that in the seminar, at least officially enrolled. So in the seminar in the 260, the  mathematical philosophy in the fall 1967, there were 14 students that were officially  enrolled. And in the one in the winter, there were 12 students that were official year old.  So I did this because, well, first of all, it's always good to have an idea of like,  was Montague teaching at all?  Was Montague free?  But also, what was he teaching?  Because teaching, especially at the graduate level, the variation that you see in the last  few years are very telling.  Because they tell you about a growing interest that he had.  So up to the seminar in 1969, I believe, at a certain point, he was supposed to teach  a seminar on recursive function and just one month before replace it on one graduate level  on one on philosophy of language.  So…  That's when he was working on… Originally it was recursive, so you mean… And he replaced it. It became… And he presents universal grammar.  And then the following quarter he continues again and he's already working on BTQ.  So you can see that there is something that was going on.  That goes back to an important point that i think you raised last night and we think a lot is like what role was natural language playing in his enterprise  was was it just an extent just an important extension of the of the goals of philosophy  using the neutrals that philosophy had or was that and maybe something more and you know of course  that and maybe something more. And you know, of course, they can only be speculations. My  feeling is that also based on how Montague had followed intellectual passions earlier,  I was not able to find an area of intellectual passion for which,, a theme, for which he became so interested intensively, both in terms of producing work and teaching, over a significant amount of years.  So from the moment things are adumbrated, 1966, let's say that, we're talking about  winter 1966, it's a crescendo.  And clearly something is capturing him.  It's not just, okay, I have one more area where I can apply my tools that I'm developing,  so let me continue, I apply here, which is a little bit what he had done before.  You know that famous quote from something that Barbara found in one of these documents that she went through  in the archive were in the margin of some paper. She will know which paper it was. He  says, oh yeah, and then there is the application of this, it was about Iowa intentional logic,  to natural language. That should be easy.  Yes, yes, I remember that. It was one of the initial ones.  Similarly to when he was working on English as a formal language,  he makes a list of all the quantifiers he wants to deal with.  You find a note.  So when the work went on, on English as a formal language,  he already had noted it wasn't quite that easy.  Yeah, but notice that even there when in the preliminary work, he said, okay, we need to  be able to handle like…  I think he has definitely has every, he has some, he has something like many, most, and  so on.  And then he says, well, we should keep plurals away for now.  So that's an example.  So clearly there was something in his mind, I think, that was deeply intrigued  by what in the beginning he thought was a relatively simple extension. Okay, one more  area I can apply my tool to. The deeper he went into it, the more he discovered that  it was like, on the one hand I think he discovered there was a lot more to do and  to understand, but I also have the feeling that somehow he discovered that there was  an area of investigation that was relatively new, interesting, and people were interested  in it.

SPEAKER_01: 1:41:19-1:41:19
 Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 1:41:20-2:09:57
 Because he had a group of people around him that showed interest.  He had people asking for the manuscript.  I saw your presentation. Can you please send me this?  And these were people outside the usual range of people that would contact him.  And I think with Montague, it's not just Montague,  but we're talking about Montague,  I think it's never possible to fully distinguish,  to separate the dimension of  like I'm doing this because there is a very precise intellectual appealing and that's it.  And there is this because I feel that I'm creating a new path and that's something exciting, that's  something pleasant. And I think there was something very important in Montague's identity  that had to do with receiving the recognition that he deserved. I think it's there constantly. It's as if like he has to be sure that there  is official recognition of his value. And if there is not, that's threatening, that's  upsetting, that's irritating. And you know, I know i want to go into psychology i don't care  the origins but i can see the pattern and and that's also why you know like it was so important  uh remember when you know when kailish made the terrible mistake mistake it was not a mistake i  think it was intentional to say the rails yeah to send you know there was break off the rails, put it that way. Yeah, to send… There was the last, I think, bad thing, really bad thing that he did.  Basically, he sent Richard to apply for the Step 4 promotion.  I remember that you see as all these tests…  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  …you become full professor.  So, Montague was already full professor Step 2 and he was applying for…  Sorry, Step 3.  He was applying for an acceleration to go to step five due to the publication and so  on.  The file had to be submitted and basically the chair had to do this.  Kalish submitted an incomplete file.  The chair didn't include the letter that the chair had to include.  So CAP, the Committee on Academic Promotion, sent the file back to say, this file cannot be submitted as such  because it's incomplete. We are missing the material from the chair. And that's when  Montague lost it completely.  This was when?  So it was spring 1969 when he applied. Spring 1969, summer 1969. What Montague did, I don't know, probably also  yelled at Keish, I don't know, but what he did, what I saw that he did, he let the rumors circulate,  not just the rumors, he said, I want to leave. I want to leave UCLA. Do you have an offer for me?  So within a couple of months he got five offers.  And one of the fanciest one was from Rutgers that was offering like more than a 50% increase in his salary, his secretary, and so on. And so what Montague did, he got the full matching from UCLA.  So first of all, now he jumped not from step three to step five, he jumped from step  three to step six, which also required external letters and so on and so forth.  So this did go through.  Yeah, yeah. That was his revenge. So when, like he said, aha, now we apply, I want this  file prepared in this, but essentially he became from a normal internal promotion, he became  retention because he had these five letters with these five offers. They went, bypassed the chair  completely, he went to Cap and Cap has to decide are we going to match it or not. They matched.  That's how Montevideo got a half-time secretary. Unfortunately, he was not able to enjoy much  because it was already, I think, winter or  spring of 1970, so just a few months before he died.  And he got the highest salary in the department, roughly at the same level as Alonzo Church.  So all this to say that…  There are only seven steps as far as I know.  So the way it works now, I don't know at that time I didn't check, so step five is the last  compulsory one, in other words mandatory one.  That is, as a full professor you need to go up to step five with the kind of rules that  you have and you need to get there by showing that you have productivity.  From step five on is optional.  So step six is the one that requires still letters as if a new tenure, but that's optional and you can do whatever you want.  And then I think, yes, you have a step 7, I believe, and then after that it's what they call, how they call it, not of step, there is another term, not of scale, not of step, there is a, you know, which is the outstanding qualification. I am asking because I actually never quite knew what degree of excellence I was  supposed to address myself.  For Ed Keenan, I wrote twice a letter and that were both sort of beyond what people  normally can reach.  So one probably was step six, which is not mandatory. And the other one is for this  outstanding excellence, I don't know if it's like university professor or something like that.  That again, it's something that is completely optional and it depends on the level for which  you need to push external letters. So I think that it was for Montague, I don't know, maybe I'm biased, I'm biased because of course I'm a linguist and the work that inspired me was the linguistic work. like let me compare what he has worked on over time how has he worked on those topics how much  of that was in his in the court in the classes he was teaching for how long did he go on developing  that topic and so i'm completely ignoring the after because montague who don't know about the  after you know like how much how many people would follow and would develop that. But just within the time he was alive, first of all, definitely Montague must have felt that there  was a time there was a lot of attention towards natural language and how you should investigate  natural language and new ways of doing that. This was a conversation that was going on  at Berkeley, at Stanford, at UCLA. So there was,, in particular, this idea that those tools  that were developing of intentional logic had something to say also about  natural language. That was clearly around. And my impression is that he may have felt  that he had found a way to turn that general interest or desire into something  that was a true research project with the level of precision that is demanded by a project like that and in general by philosophical enterprise.  I think that's what Potentia found fascinating.  It's true as Chomsky said, well, in any case it was not proving any theorem, but the point  was not to prove a theorem.  At least I don't know if he, maybe he discovered that something exciting is not just, you know,  proving a theorem is always important if you come from a certain kind of background.  But there what he found was really a potentially fascinating, challenging, difficult implementation  of the research program that is, use IOR logic to understand the world, to understand matters  of, you know, human knowledge, intellectual knowledge.  And here it is, human language. And that note is important, easy, and then not that easy.  Remember in the textbook, the introduction to the textbook says, even if possible, it  wouldn't be an enterprise of interest for the authors. Three years later, oh, now it's interesting. Now it becomes a major challenge or an interesting challenge.  And, and so that's the, the, the, the way I'm trying to address the question that  you raised is like, what is the role that natural language was having in Montague  at that time?  Of course, I, you know, we cannot make any prediction about how, for how long he  would have gone like that.  But in that moment, I think of his intellectual life.  Just think about the fact that he, among the books that he had in his mind,  like I found the list, like the books that he was working on, five projects.  The only real new one, together with the one that was almost completed on recursive function,  that my understanding, I know nothing about recursive functions. I asked people that know a little bit more to take a look.  And there was nothing... This is the one that he developed with Perry Smith.  Yeah, yeah. Recursion theory is a branch of model theory.  Exactly. So I'm not able to judge that. But crucially he put that project aside. I mean, in the last few years  he was not working much. I don't know that there would have been much more to say.  I mean, the point he was making was that recursion theory could be understood as a branch part of the theory of syntactic forms  of definition. So there's the arithmetical hierarchy, where you've got these formulas Formulas that define sets of numbers that can be...  So the lowest class of recursive functions or recursive sets is...  Those are the sets that can define by an arithmetical formula with just one existential quantifier in front of it, and at the same time also  buy such a formula with a universal quantifier in front of it. And then so that actually gives  you this hierarchy. It starts with the, that's the primitive term, okay, it starts syntactically speaking with these propositional formulas built from arithmetical  predication like plus y is z and whatever you might still add by way of mathematical predicates. But basically plus and times,  that's what's one of  Gödel's great achievements that you could actually do  all this stuff of encoding with just plus and times.  And then the hierarchy is,  is produced by ever more complicated  quantifier alternations and prefix. And so what that  project was about was to develop the notions of recursion theory in terms of definability of these different forms, that is with more or less complex quantifier  formulas. And then to show that the definition by Gogol in terms of equations  and Turing's definition in terms of Turing computability and Church's notion in terms  of lambda definability, which actually also comes quite close to this idea that these  are all sort of like completeness theorems basically. And then the idea was, well, I special case of natural numbers, but we can generalize this to arbitrary languages with  a propositional core and then quantifiers. And with a propositional core, there are various  things about what the atomic formulas are that you can assume there. But so in that sense recursive function  theory can be considered as a special case of this more general notion of general recursion  where it is the same story of this hierarchy combined with specific assumptions then about the  specific assumptions then about the verifiability or computational verification of the atomic formulas of these languages of which the language of arithmetic is just one.  And so that was the basic idea. Perhaps one could have gone further by working out more about these computation or verifiability  conditions of these atomic synthesis of these different predicates of these different languages.  But I don't think there is much in the manuscript.  And maybe you're right in saying that he lost interest also in the sense that he was no longer motivated in exploring that option much further.  Well, you know, he had a book contract and three out of the four chapters were written.  And the book contract and the three chapters, based on what I found in his archive, were  ready by either the end of 68 or the beginning of 69.  So Montague died two years later.  So in two years, it's as if there was not a priority.  And crucially, it was a project probably due to the personality of Perry Smith that he  would never be able to handle by himself.  In fact, there is this correspondence in two or three years after Montague's death where  the publisher said, well, you know, only one chapter is missing.  Do you think you can do it?  Paris says, well, I'm thinking about it.  I'm working on it.  Never.  Nothing ever happened.  Was it actually going to be a joint authorship?  Yeah.  Ah, yeah.  Yeah, it was a joint authorship.  Has it ever been… is it available in any form?  I can share with you in the sense that it's what I found in the Montague archive.  So he had like the… and not just what I found in the Montague archive, which was partially that, and that what Perry gave me.  I don't know if I mentioned I was able to meet with Perry, although it was a difficult  interaction.  But there were alternational moments, and in those moments where he was more present,  even before we met, he had found lots of things that were irrelevant, but one thing that was  particularly relevant was that manuscript.  I think I must still have it.  There's a big chest next to it, where I keep some historical…  You mean the manuscript?  I have one in Montague's own longhand.  I don't know if there's a copy, but it's probably the same.  Well, I'm happy to share the one that I have.  I've digitized everything, so I can send it to you and if you ever have the chance  to find it, you can tell me if there is any crucial difference.  But the one that I have is actually typed and ready.  So clearly, it was already sent to…  I mean, we are at the level of, and that's probably  why the publisher writes like, well, we have three, we're missing the last chapter, I think  the project was out of four chapters, and that chapter was never written.  And do you have any idea what was planned to be in there?  No.  I can go back and check my notes.  Nothing pops up in my mind which may be... But I cannot exclude, for example,  that the manuscript had some kind of table of contents where maybe the title of the chapter...  I see, right.  I need to go back for that. I don't have that visual memory now.  I agree.  But what I know is that there is no... That chapter does not... I have not found that chapter.  Perry, the material that Perry gave me does not contain anything,  and the letters that I found in the Montague archive are clearly talking about a missing  chapter, the last one that is needed in order to be completed.  So it's interesting because at the time when Montague was engaged in this, I don't  know whether I went back much before I got there, but certainly in the first two  years it was one of the things that he was actively and enthusiastically involved in.  Yes, that's something I'm going to talk about.  And that sort of also stimulated the whole thing, I think.  There was a real, I think one can say competition  between him, as far as this was concerned, and Moscovakis.  Oh yeah, I interviewed him. He's a very sweet guy, very diplomatic, but I think I  got a sense of what was going on in those years.  So, Yanis, I thought, was thinking it was completely trivial, as Montague was doing.  And the real problem was, I guess, his more general notion of an algorithm.  I think from the interview that I was in a few years ago, very diplomatically told me that it was hard for him to see the relevance  that in order to advance what has already been produced, the relevance of that kind  of line of investigation.  My impression is that whatever the reasons are, is that either because he realized that  it was less urgent or maybe he lost some of the interest, is that either because he realized that it was less urgent or maybe  he lost some of the interest, or maybe just because he got more passionate about other  things.  Remember, I was telling you there is this list of books that he's working on that probably  was compiled just a few months before he died.  We're talking about when he was working on PTQ, so fall 1970.  What were the other books on that list?  One was the Pfeffermann book, of course.  So, that's why I say the only new project is the one that I…  Let me get the slides so I can remember.  So, for sure, it's the Pfeffermann project, the book with Pfeffermann, the book with Scott and Tarski.  Yeah.  They were still on the list.  They were still on the list.  Oh, yeah.  The list, they don't…  I told you because the book actually, that was something that although slowly they kept  working, in fact, by the time Montague died…  I'm just looking for the slides so I can share.  You can see what he wrote because that's…  Okay.  Sorry. And so that book, the book with Scott and Tarski was something that was still moving,  unlike the one with Fefferman.  I think the one with Fefferman was not going anywhere and he had already... Let's see the slides...  These are the Partey workshop,  that's the teaching,  where do we have the slides with the book he was working on...  Okay, so I can show you at least this.  English as a formal language,  and that's what he said in person.  I found myself in the unprecedented state of almost complete  agreement with the preceding speaker, Davidson.  Like Professor Davidson, I reject the contention that there is a basic  theoretic difference between artificial and natural languages like him.  I also regard the construction of a theory of truth as the basic goal of  serious linguistics.  Although I think, hmm should say not exactly a theory of truth,  but rather a theory of the more general notion of truth under an arbitrary interpretation.  It is this more general notion that is required to analyze the notion of logical consequence.  And indeed, the notion of logical consequence itself was, I think, required in Professor Davidson's discussion, particularly  blah blah blah.  Yeah, yeah. There was one more thing that I wanted to say in response to what you were  saying about this, and that is that, in a way, what Davidson does in that paper, I mean, he provides these predicate logic  formulas.  I mean, the model theory for predicate logic we already had, even before Montague started  doing his thing. So, as far as getting a definition of logical consequence for those formulas that Davidson  proposes, that could not have been a problem.  The only way in which I can see a real difference between that proposal of Davidson and what Montague was doing it and now I'm repeating  myself is that in Davidson you just posits these formulas without  telling you anything about how you get there. But once you get to these  formulas that the question of logical consequence has already been sorted out. I have a feeling that one aspect of what moved Montague to say this in this bit that you  just showed me was that that's not really a semantics for natural language for the sentences that, in particular, that Davidson gives as a starting  point for the analysis. And that this question whether you can use something like Davidson  was proposing as sort of an example or a first entry into the more general question of the theory of truth for  natural language as opposed to the theory of logical consequence for  natural language. I would have liked to see, I don't know, have you seen this  transcript of Davidson's? Unfortunately, let me double check because I had to request the copies.  I may check in my archive.  I may have only part of it.  What I do remember, though, and so if I remember that, it must be the case that I've seen that Davidson paper because something that comes to my mind now that you say that is that look how different what Davidson said at the conference is from  what he wrote.  I see.  So that might be key to understand.  Yeah.  And while here, you know, I have the entire presentation, oral presentation, the transcription  of what Montague said is almost like he uses the same expression.  He literally took from the transcription and so which means it was written in that way.  Yeah, yeah.  So that's what I remember. So since I have this memory, it must be the case that—and  I can check. I'll check in the archive and I'll let you know. I'm frustrated.  I do have the slides, and sometimes in your mind they're organized with the list of the five manuscripts.  So I do have four of them in my mind, and I was telling you that it's the one with Tarski and Scott,  the one with Fefferman, the one with Perry Smith.  And there was a fourth one that now I can't remember,  but the one that clearly was the most recent one added to the list and the one where there were remarks about I want to add this was the one on natural  language. Okay, let me, I need to have this slide because now it's frustrating, where  he says, here it is, okay, yeah, it's under, because I want to present that in 1971 there  was no evidence that he wanted to die. That was the point of this slide, okay? So this  is the axiomatic, an axiomatic approach to set theory, that's the Scott and Tarski.  Then higher order logic and abstract recursion theory with Perry Smith by North Holland,  written three out of four chapters before Montague's death.  Then this was the one with Feferman that Feferman had given up with.  And then the analysis of language or logical logical analysis and ordinary language, or language  and meaning, he alternates between these.  And in some of the notes he says, you know, the three papers, because that's written when  he already had PTQ in mind, so there will be the three.  And then he had two more that he wanted to add, a five-chapter book.  And then this was a more like, you know, you collect your philosophical paper, so this  was not supposed, the last volume was not supposed to have new material but it was a way to present what he  defines as is more philosophical papers into a unit and this was then i think what uh inspired  so this book the contract that he had for this book was with the publisher that then later  published formal philosophy because what kaplan told me is that the publisher got in touch with him, with Kaplan, and said, what can we do now?  Are you willing to publish some of the material, maybe combine the two projects?  It's Yale University Press, isn't it?  Yeah, Yale University Press.  That's the story that Kaplan told me.  Kaplan said, I didn't feel that I could do it.  It was too close to Richard's death.  Yeah, yeah. That's interesting because I always thought that it was Yale University Press because  Richard Thomason did. No, no. It's the other way around.  So Montague already had a contract with them for the analysis of language. So it was Kaplan  that suggested Thomason as somebody that could work on that. That I knew, but was the suggestion also because Thomasson had already had some kind of contact  with Yale in a past?  No, I think the suggestion only came from Kaplan because I think they asked,  okay, you're not willing to work on it, who would you suggest that he's able to do that?  So Thomasson was or had recently been jailer, nothing to do with it.  No, no. The contract already existed. They wanted to publish something that now wouldn't be  by Montague directly anymore, but a collection of his work. I need to double check, I don't remember  if the collection of the more philosophical paper was with Yale University Press as well,  and so when he died, they may  have decided to combine the two projects because the collection is a collection not just for  the linguistic paper, but clearly the paper that are more philosophically and linguistically  inclined. And so maybe they combined it. I need to see if there is any evidence. I could  also ask Thomason if he remembers that there was this, how the project was presented to him.  Because crucially this project was built out of five chapters and two of them would be  new.  I think that at that time Thomasin had already moved to Pittsburgh.  Yeah, yeah.  He was not in Yale anymore.  And I do remember because Montague wrote letters for his hire.  So there is a copy of the letter.  Which is actually an interesting letter because in those days it was very, I think it was  not uncommon to ask to rank people that are available in the market.  And although these days I think people are more cautious in doing that.  So there was a direct comparison.  And in that letter, which was written in 1970, I I think, yeah I think in 1970, which I remember, 1969, probably early 70s, he compares...  They were looking for a logician, okay? Somebody with a strong formal training in logic.  And so his recommendation number one was thompson his recommendation number two was  recommendation they were asking probably from the way the tone of the letter i think they may have  sent a list of people and they were asking his opinion for these people that they were considering  i guess it was a common practice of it at least not uncommon people said we are considering these  candidates can you tell us your opinion about these candidates?" And he would say that, well, as a logician you should hire Thomasson.  David Lewis is brilliant, but does not have the same kind of formal background that Thomasson  has.  True.

default: 2:09:57-2:09:58
 True.

SPEAKER_00: 2:09:58-2:30:17
 I mean, of course, you know, we can read a lot of things in letters, there is this indirect  inference, but the statement, I think, is true.  It's fair to say.  So that's the...  And to me, the reason why I was mentioning this fact is that, again, at the end of his  life, the thing that he's more actively engaged with, the thing that clearly requires new  things that has not been produced yet is the work,  the analysis of natural language or formal treatment of ordinary language,  for which he wants to write two more chapters, two more papers.  So whatever it was, it was something that was very alive in his mind, very active, triggering excitement, interest,  desire of making that as public and as important as a book.  Because my understanding is that a book academically has a weight, has a role, fixes like, look,  there is this corpus of work that I have done that has some kind of consistency, that gives  a vision of something. If it's just a side project, you  don't care about publishing a book out of it. So, at least that's what I can conclude  about Montague, you know, early, you know, fall 1970, early 1971. I also wonder, because there is little left of Montague, I mean, in terms of information  what was going on with Montague in general, his life in that period.  The only...  Dana has always been very reserved with a few exceptions, but once he felt like sharing this memory that he had  of Montague just, I think, a few weeks before he died.  I don't remember where they saw each other if Montague—maybe it was in Berkeley, went  for something in Berkeley.  Yeah, because Dan and I were walking on a street like, oh, Richard and I were here.  I remember we were walking on this street.  And I remember this remark that he made about, you see, I'm losing my hair, I'm getting old.  And he said there was a sadness, again, this was surprising because normally Dana doesn't  make remarks of this kind, but it was probably one of those emotional moments where, it's  strange because it was a kind of sadness that normally Richard wouldn't have, he would always  be very kind of playful and ironic or something  like that.  But it was serious and he felt like, you know, remember this, like, look, I'm losing my  hair, I'm getting old.  So it can be sort of half playfully said and yet.  Also with somebody that was very…  Doses of sadness, yeah.  And I wonder, you know, it could also be that in that moment, you know, I think academic  work has always been a source of both recognition and excitement and energy for Montague. Definitely it was the part of him  that he felt could totally control.  And like, I know what's going on.  I know how to handle it.  I know how to proceed from one step to another.  There was a very different kind of excitement  in the sense that it's a totally controlled excitement,  which is a form of empowering.  And of course, you know, the other dimension of his life was, as we know, more problematic.  He had essentially, you know, he was getting old, it's true, he was 40, but the world around him like they were like his parents they were falling apart  like the father that was no more the mother that was clearly losing some of the energy that she had  the falling apart of his relationship with Bob my understanding is that it was Bob that at a certain point said that's it I move out and the arrangement that they found saw that Bob, I think, purchased, at a symbolic  price probably, the house where they lived together. That's where he lived until he died.  Although clearly they stayed in touch, clearly they were interacting with each other. Probably  that happened around 1967 or 68, I think, when that kind of more official split happened.  And that's when Montague started getting students that would at least be roommates,  so that he wouldn't be alone in that house.  And I was able to contact a couple of them.  One was actually…  The one who was there during the…  Well, the one that was left one week before, or actually a few days before, and it was  interviewed by the police.  I see.  I think I shared this with you.  It just happened because…  There was nobody there at the time, was there?  Well, actually, so the way…  My understanding is the following, that Montali, when he had Westerdahl as a roommate, he also  had a student.  So there were at least three bedrooms in that house.  And so there was a student that was there like a UCLA graduate student that I was able  to talk to. He was Greek and I was able to get in touch with him because I saw that's  the good thing about having an unusual name. His son looked like a Greek name and did a  search at UCLA around those years and said,  this could be possible.  Does this person still act?  Yes, he has a LinkedIn account.  Let me try.  Is it by any chance the case that you were at UCLA?  And they were like, what?  How do you know that?  And so I had to explain because he knew because…  It was his car that they took, isn't it?  No, no.  It was a Westerdell car.  So Westerdell was the same age as Montague.  He was an architect, he was white, and probably the two of them were friends.  So they knew each other.  I think I told you that the night Montague was… tell me if I'm repeating myself,  okay? So the night that Montague was murdered, the two of them went together to Montague's parents'  place to celebrate his father, Montague's father's birthday.  Oh, I see.  And it was, I checked, it was Montague's father's birthday.  So these men, they just celebrated his birthday because there was a Saturday, March 6, 1971.  What Westendahl tells the police, and the reason why I have access to the—remember,  the case is unsolved, so in theory I tried, but with the Freedom of Information Act you  don't go anywhere, because when a case is unsolved, you don't have the right to access  the material.  I see.  I was lucky enough that the detective that reopened the case in the  cold case unit understood what I was doing and was willing to share things that legally  you are not allowed to share.  Oh, I see.  Not even somebody in the public.  Was that because he had been called officially as a witness?  No, no, no.  It's just because the rule is that if the case  has not been solved, all the information concerning the case cannot be publicly released because  you don't know if... Of course we know that nothing is going to handle this case, but  the law is not made in... I see. So if that information is relevant, then it has been  solved. It couldn't be used in court anyway. Yes, exactly. And so basically he said, you know, I think I need to go to the bathroom,  leaving everything open and giving me the kind of look. And so, and then he commented too,  by the way, so it was not just me. And so he commented on the fact that he, you know,  what Westerdorf said. So I have the recording. He let me record his voice,  so this is not just my memory.  And so he read what Westerdorf told the police.  And what Westerdorf told the police,  so it's not even the policeman telling the story.  He was reading from what Westerdorf told the police.  Makes not much sense.  Essentially, the story says,  Montague asked me if I wanted to go to a dinner  with his  parents because it was father's birthday and the father couldn't go out anymore.  And that's all true.  So then we go with my car because Montague says that his car has been probably with the  ignition and so on.  So we use my car, we go there, we have dinner, we come back home, it's around 10pm. At that point Montague asked me if I'm going to go out with him.  And I said no, I feel kind of tired, I don't want to go out.  And so he asked if he can borrow my car because of the ignition problem.  And I said sure, no problem, in case of emergency I have my job car.  So he had two cars available.  So Montague takes my car, goes out around 10.30, and then I change my mind and I decide  to go out as well.  I came back at 2pm and Montague is not back because I don't see my car.  So I go to sleep around 2.30.  Around a quarter to six, six, I was woken up by the sound of this guy going down the stairs, almost like slamming  the door of a fridge, then opening the door. And I, you know, it was still dark, it's March,  so at that time, still dark, so I opened my window to check what's happening and I see  two or three black guys jumping on my car and driving away.  I called the police, and we had the first call,  to say my car was stolen.  A few minutes later, he says,  I went to check for my roommate, for Montague,  and I see his body there.  So he calls the police again to say send an ambulance.  It's possible that Montague was still breathing,  although his brain probably was already gone. But the ambulance arrived.  Notice that before he calls the ambulance, he calls Bob.  Well, at least Bob manages to get there before the ambulance comes.  I see.  And then the ambulance comes.  You could also be...  Bob was living much closer than the ambulance.  He had to drive out.  And so, but notice that, so Westerdahl, John, I think was his name, calls Bob right away.  Oh, so I see.  Yes, yes, I see.  So Bob arrives very, very quickly so that he manages to arrive even before the ambulance comes.  That's at least what is written in the police report.  When the police and the ambulance arrives, they find Westerndal and Bob there,  and the body.  So that's the people.  One week, actually even less than one week, four or five days later,  earlier, sorry, the student, student the graduate student was a roommate  decided to leave the house abruptly and did not have the chance to talk he said i want to talk  to montague in person about this but he was never at home i tried to leave a message and then you  know i hear that he has been murdered because at least that's what he told me it's like i've been  there i think from from general since since January but something was not working in  particular often there were parties and one night a guy came inside my room and  I don't feel comfortable my girlfriend at that time told me just came and moved  with me and that's what I did I want to tell Montague about it but it was never  at all when I was at home. So this is a plain contradiction.  So as far as Westerdahl is concerned, yes, the story is full of contradictions.  First of all because…  But the boy is the one that you were able to contact, is that right?  Yes, Westerdahl died in 1985.  I see.  And the only thing that I know, because I was able to get in touch with some of his  nieces and nephews, is that they remember the uncle, they remember that he was living  with a black man and that he was into black guys, but he never told them anything about  having a roommate that was murdered and so on. Uh, I was able to find the partner that he was with, not when, not at the time  he did not have a partner, just...  He is now who?  So Westerdahl, uh, at the time when Montague was murdered in 1971, as far as I know,  I was able to reconstruct, did not have a stable partner, so both of them were single men.  I see.  Single gay white men.  Yeah, yeah.  A few years later, the nephews and nieces remember they said like in the mid-70s,  I do remember that he had a partner because we would have, you know, we would bring the partner,  we would go to their place, and he was a black guy, a little bit younger than my uncle.  They remember the name and I was able and said, and he was in position. This is the nephew of this Westerdahl?  Of Westerdahl, yes. Say I remember the name and I remember there was a jazz player,  a piano player, a jazz piano player in LA. And so I was able to find him except that, you know,  I tried to do different addresses. That was before the pandemic because it was in his,  at that time, must have been in the early 80s, he never replied.  I didn't get the letters back, so it means that the address exists somehow,  but he never replied.  So the reason why this was important for me is because,  I mean, important to a certain point.  I mean, I like to be able to establish the truth as close as possible to the truth.  I agree with you that this story that the roommate, Westertal,  told the police is not very, Westerdahl, told the police makes  not much sense because, first of all, why do you tell the police that you were kind  of like roommates but you don't know him very well when then you say that he took you to  his parents' place for the birthday?  This is a very personal thing to begin with.  Second, you let him use your car, not for an emergency, but for clearly going out.  I think, honestly, by putting all the pieces together, I think what happened there is that the two of them were good friends and probably they would go out together to the places where you could cruise. And that's what they did that night.  And that's why it was Westerdahl's car that was used. And that's why the guys took Westerdahl's  car because that's the car that they... It was used to pick them up. So when you're leaving,  you take the same car, you know that it's there, you can drive it. So probably they came back.  And now I don't know if it was, you know, maybe they went  to separate rooms, it doesn't matter, but I mean, Ressedal knew… Ressedal was there all the time,  you think, from the moment that Richard came back with these people. Yeah, yeah. And, you know,  because probably they picked them up together. They were there together. Yeah, yeah, that's my  influence. Yeah. But now, I understand. Now, put yourself in 1971 with the kind of attitude there was towards homosexuality.  Now, you are in a situation in which the roommate, your friend, has been murdered probably because  of some erotic thing.  Two or three maybe young military guys, black guys were involved that you picked up like that.  You are a white gay architect. You want to come out as a gay man involved in a murder  because there was some sexual thing going on? Your life is destroyed. The police, the  detective was very honest. Looking at what they did, what they wrote, I think, I agree with you, the story is very  suspicious but clearly they decided to close the case because those cases were not investigated.  What would have been the benefit of finding out?  And also, he told me, it was kind of explicit explicit like in that time these cases were no  relevant cases like you know and he said initially because it's here in the  report two teams of investigators were sent because when they heard Beverly  Hills UCLA professor murdered that's gonna be a big case they started  interviewing people and talk to Bob. They realized this was  a gay guy and probably brought some young guy that he was paying to have sex with. UCLA,  the parents were probably destroyed and not willing to push him.  Well, that's what David Kaplan told me about it. He said the police were very sensitive  in the way they handled this and apparently also, I mean, he was the police were very sensitive in the way they handled this.  And apparently also, I mean, he was the one that sort of represented the employer,  that's the department.  And he told me that, I said, well, Professor Kaplan,  we could continue this and we might find something.  But let us also think of his parents, more or less. I don't know if there was like, you know, there are many things you can tell the parents.  Is it really true that your parents, it's better for parents not to know that, I don't  know, I mean, to me it sounds a little bit like an excuse of like… No, it was.  So that's certainly not the message I got from what David told me.  It was more like, I mean, I knew that Richard was gay and I mean I knew Bob and so forth, you've told me.  So they may very well have drawn the inference from the little I heard that most people heard  me.  But it's still a different thing whether that becomes a public thing in the media and all that.  And their neighbors sort of asking them, do you know?  Much, much worse.  It was that aspect.  And so in the end, there was not much of an investigation.  And I mentioned that to you, the parents arranged a funeral, which was in a modest funeral home  in the San Fernando Valley.  There was a group from the department, they went to the funeral.  At that time, the department chair was Montgomery Firth.  So Firth read a one-page speech.  Some of the material then went into the obituary that was written for the UC obituary system,  the one that was written by Firth, Church and there's a third name.  Yeah, it was Kaplan. Not Ka third name. Yeah, it was Kaplan.  Not Kaplan?  Yeah, maybe it was Kaplan. So Church, Kaplan and Firth. Not Keilish.  Another interesting thing is that the department never organized anything to remember Montague.  And just the destiny decided to create a striking contrast because  two months later, so this is March, in June, so three months later, a professor in the UCLA  Philosophy Department, his name was I think Arnold Kaufman, died because the airplane he was on  fell somewhere.  He was half in philosophy and half in law.  In August, in the middle of the summer, the philosophy department and the law department  organized a significant event to celebrate the figure with people speaking and with people talking.  In the middle of the summer for Kauffman.  Now all the respect, this should be done for every member.  It was very highly regarded.  It's completely right.  But the contrast is amazing.  Yeah.  I mean, nothing, nothing of any kind.  So I think there was, on the one hand, there was of course shock.  And there was also shock when somebody dies because the airplane falls.  That's not expected.  But there was also, I think, embarrassment surrounding this death.

default: 2:30:23-2:30:24
 And probably, I cannot exclude that some subconscious level for some people was like a relief.

SPEAKER_00: 2:30:29-2:39:16
 I cannot exclude it because I think the atmosphere in that department at that point was really heavy.  Well, it was certainly during the three years I was there and I just never  And it only got worse.  It seems it got worse.  Remember, like, unless they were in Bergen, there was all that tremendous thing that Keilisch  did and then Montague getting the five-year.  Now, you can imagine because, I mean, I've been in academia enough, you too, so imagine all  the people in that department, all the senior people that all of a sudden, we go from Montague  not getting his promotion from step three to step five, to Montague skyrocketing to  step six with a salary that is the highest in the department and Montague was only 39  when he got this.  What do you think their reaction was there?  Is he really that good?  Yeah, exactly.  Like, oh, as usual, he gets what he wants.  Now it's going to be even more annoying.  How can we…  Maybe it was our chance to let him go somewhere.  Yeah, but what is also amazing is that the department, if this is in fact true, never  really did something to compensate for that, say by having some big thing or something  five years after his death or ten years after his death.  I mean Kaplan asked me if I was willing to work on something, maybe occasionally the book would be out.  And I felt like, first of all, I don't know when the book will be ready.  I cannot promise anything because clearly this cannot be the central. At that stage, I think't know when the book will be ready. I cannot promise anything because clearly, you know, this cannot be the central at that stage.  I think it was right after my tenure.  Like, sure, now I can at least work on the book, but, you know, I don't have the resources to make this the only.  I have students, I have to keep publishing.  So, and there was still a lot of work to do in the research at that time.  And the other thing is I try very politely to say, well, maybe we should find somewhere  else also, another place.  Is it really fair that...  Also, I don't know what kind of support there is to this because you need resources, you  need participation.  It would be nice that after all these years, I was hoping maybe in the 50th anniversary,  but then other things happened.  It would also be a way to later recognize that still this figure is one of the most  important ones that you have ever had.  One thing is whether one should try and do something or should have tried earlier,  quite independently of where he was, simply because it was important. And then the question  is who would do it and where should it happen? But there is also a special – well, duty is perhaps a strong word, but a special reason that his department might have  for coming clean on this, so to speak.  I agree.  I agree.  No, no, I agree.  But David was looking for somebody who would take the initiative and I was very honest  with him.  David, I do not have the resources because I don't have the money and the power to do  it and I'm not have the resources because I don't have the money and the power to do it and  I'm not in the UCLA department. So I'm happy to participate. So when Walter  Dean contacted me, I said you know Walter I'm willing to consider this but keep in mind that  if you want to do it you need funding and if you want to do it in the us and california it must be  substantial funding it's not that easy to have organized a symposium without a significant amount  of funding and honestly i don't have the kind of network that allows me to have you know access to  that money because the only thing i applied to are research grants and that's a different kind  of grant. Absolutely.  So it would be something like Kaplan that is able to talk to the right people at UCLA  to get that kind of resources.  But the department has got the money.  That's not the right…  They got 20 million from Kaplan's son.  Yeah, I know, I know.  I mean, if they wanted to.  I know, believe me, I know.  And I was hoping like, David, maybe ask your son to put a commission like on half a million  of that money that has to be used.  A hundred thousand would have been plenty for such a meeting.  But no, I was hoping…  No, sorry, what I was thinking, I was hoping that he would ask, create some sort of like fellowship for graduate students for Montague's name, which would be a way relatively simple.  So he could do like, it's an endowed scholarship for graduate students working on a certain  area of philosophy, for example, and it's the Richard Montague Scholarship Fund.  That would have been a simple way, no more money needed, to basically remove it.  Yeah, that also sort of points at a different kind of…  What's the right word?  A sort of competitive tension between those two.  It's very different from all the…  Oh yeah, I know. Especially like I can imagine a young brilliant student and then faculty  member concerned about the shadow, being in the shadow of… They worked very…  The way… yeah.  You remember, you must know the story. From the very beginning, there was both mutual  interest but also tension from the choice that Kaplan made to have Carnap as his official  supervisor on his thesis. Kaplan was very explicit on it. There was no doubt that I would be the last  student, sorry, Carnap's last student. I wanted that and I made it clear.  I mean it is true that most of my work was with Montague.  Yeah, that's both of them.  So he was honest. He said that I could not, and I told Richard, Richard, it has  to be Carnap. And so I think in the end they found a way to go over that. In fact, they  collaborated a lot right after they wrote paper.  They had their NSF grant starts when Kaplan becomes a professor in 1964 and goes on at least until he gets progressed every time renewed or extended or modified.  I think until 1969 and that's when they then apply on his own for a project where natural language plays, semantics plays  an important role.  Up to then it was developmental by order logic.  So they shared the grant, which meant at that time probably meant the possibility of travel  money, inviting people, maybe supporting students.  Some salary.  Yeah, some salary, are salary for example. So in that sense they kept collaborating  and tracking, but of course I can imagine for somebody like Kaplan there was also the  issue of making clear that, you know, I'm not just his assistant, you know, there's  also me with my own ideas. Not just his student.  Yeah, yeah, the students. So apparently when Richard first came to UCLA, it was very short notice to replace  Weichenbach.  So David was still an undergraduate and he was in that course.  Yeah.  Actually, you must have heard the story from David.  I reconstructed.  Memory can do that. I think I reconstructed both  what happened and both what David's memory did. So, you know, David has a very, and I  understand, I mean, look, I wish I could have been Carnap's student, okay? I mean, it would  have been such a tremendous intellectual experience. And also my understanding is that Carnap was a very gentle person  kind of like reserved but gentle and available and...  An intelligent professor in the best sense of the word.  Exactly, you're right. Perfect.  So I can imagine somebody that is looking, a young brilliant student is looking for inspiration and here it is, the very famous professor that is also understandable,  that is actually really interested in sharing knowledge.  Because the actual story that I have the document that shows that is that Reichenbach died in  1963.  Sorry?  Reichenbach died in 1963 while he was teaching.  And David was taking the class.  But actually Montague… sorry, sorry, in 1950.

default: 2:39:16-2:39:19
 Montague was hired in January 1955.

SPEAKER_00: 2:39:19-2:39:31
 No, no, but that was…  No, no.  What David remembers is that Montague  was asked to come  to...  To replace Weishaupt.  To replace...  No.  That's not true.  No, it never happened.

SPEAKER_01: 2:39:31-2:39:31
 Ah.

SPEAKER_00: 2:39:32-2:51:49
 You know what happened  instead?  So that's why I remember.  I don't think he's lying.  What happened  is the following.  Montague arrived  January 1955.  David told me  that he met him  right away  because Kalish  had organized,  oh, today Richard is coming, you guys are coming all together, we are taking him to the coffee place,  we're gonna... he's a genius, blah, blah, blah. And so he remembers that very vividly.  But since I do know David shared his class records from UCLA, so I know all the courses  he took when he took them.  And I have the one that Montague taught.  Yeah.  So, and then I have the class notes, the lecture notes.  So Kaplan was in the class that Montague was teaching  on the semantics, what was called like semantics,  that normally would be the class that Carnap would be teaching  with the notes that Carnap prepared.  And now you're seeing the lecture notes at a certain point Montagu asks a student to prove  the theorem and, you know, in the lecture notes says blah blah cannot prove the theorem.  Professor Montagu says it's not the student's fault.  There is a problem in the proof.  This is some… this is stuff of Carnap's, not of Reichenbach's.  Carnap.  Carnap's, not of Reichenbach's. Carnap. Carnap.  So David's memory shifted, I think, to protect somehow Carnap, it shifted to Reichenbach.  That is actually Carnap.  I've been living under this total misconception.  And I went to… because I said, well, maybe, how do I know, maybe Montague was called all  of a sudden in 1953  to teach just for a few months.  No, the records clearly show  that he was a teaching assistant in a class at Berkeley.  So it's impossible that he would come to UCLA.  I mean, he was hired,  and plus he was working as the choir director.  There was no way for him to move to Los Angeles.  There are plenty of evidence that he was there.  Berkeley, he had just got his MA.  Actually he got the MA that summer, 1953.  He was working as a choir director.  He was working as a teaching assistant.  Fay Furman remembers him.  So being there over time.  Being there over time, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.  Because that was the time when also Dana Scott had arrived.  So there was that time of overlapping because Dana arrived in 1952.  Yes, Montague was in 1948, Dana in 1952.  So yes, they were both in the class with Tarski.  So there was…  That is actually an extraordinary trick of memory, I must say.  The story that I still remember sitting, and it was when I was at UCLA in either 1997 or  1999, I was faster then, and sitting in the car with David and telling me that story.  I remember David saying exactly that story, which for me was like, wow, let me go and check.  Now it's possible.  And they said, okay, hold on.  First of all, there's no evidence that Montague could have been for that time.  If you teach a class, you have to be there at least a few weeks.  So how do you do that?  And then when I was going through all the lecture notes, generally I was interested,  like what did Montague teach as soon as he arrived there?  And he taught the semantics.  And then if you see, it's exactly what David told me in the story.  There was a proof, a student went to the blackboard, but then he couldn't and everybody was like,  oh my God, now what's going to happen?  And Montague very mildly said, oh no, you're right, there's a problem there.  So your assignment for next time is going to be figuring out how you should do the proof.  So that part is the same. But David actually told me it was quite explicitly. So,  Reichen was teaching this stuff on probability that he was working on. It came out as this  problem. We'll come out with probability and it is indeed lots of theorems with little probes.  lots of theorems with little probes. And that is so Richard took over in the middle of the semester,  having to continue teaching that book.  And the first time he,  instead of writing, appeared in front of the students.  So what have you been doing?  And they were saying, we're doing these probes.  And then Montague was  signed. I think the way David told the story to me was that Montague was  signed then as an exercise for the next class proving so and so many,  much knowing of all that there was no probe.  On the one hand, the stories are very similar, but on the other hand, it was so specific,  it made so much aplomb, I mean these details about that particular text, which was quite  important.  I cannot exclude, of course I was not there, and we have somebody who was there that has  this very vivid memory, except there are lots of things that don't fit the picture. Montague was overbooked at that time, he was  also about to file his MA thesis with Tarski. The memory of Fefferman who was the TA in the class that Montague and Dana were taking that semester at Berkeley.  Of course, the other crucial thing is that in Montague's work was very meticulous in  the material.  He kept everything extremely organized.  The current archive is organized according to his criteria.  He kept everything everything.  Yes.  How is it possible that there is no material in that class?  He has material on all the other courses. The current or prime is organized according to his criteria. They teach everything. Yes. How is it possible that there is no material of that class?  He has material on all the other courses.  I mean, you are called all of a sudden to…  Sure, one could say, I can see David could make the point, well, you know, he was not  a professor at UCLA yet.  He came, they gave him some material, he had to like, you know, he did not have an office  where he could keep the staff, so even if  he had something, he would be brought back to Berkeley and then stay in Berkeley. That's  impossible, okay? I cannot exclude that. But you know, this is not insignificant.  No, it was an extraordinary distinction. I mean, the way it was presented was an extraordinary  distinction that they would get this graduate student from Berkeley to replace somebody as famous as Eisenbach.  So if it was true, certainly there would be something.  Montague had brought to UCLA, because they found the famous box that I told you,  the one that was not destroyed but the archivist, that was personal stuff, in that box, he had  the lecture notes that he took when he was going to the college in Stockton, because he finished, he graduated 17.  From 17 to 18 he went to the private side of this college that was otherwise a community college,  and he went like with the degree in journalism. So he took course about writing, he took course about  things, one about politics, ethics, something like that. He kept those notes. There was one about poetry. He kept the notes, some of the materials, some of the assignments.  So he brought those things to Berkeley first and then to UCLA in his office.  How is it possible that you run into a problematic passage of such a famous philosopher and you  don't keep the lecture notes?  I don't know.  I mean, of course,  everything is possible. It's possible that Montague would drive, I don't know, Friday  afternoon to teach the lecture. I cannot exclude that and then drive back too. But especially,  there are so many similarities. Is it possible that this is…  I mean, the driving back and forth, given the distance. I mean,  that you should actually have come once a week to teach the section and then drive back.  I mean, okay if you do it over a weekend and maybe you are with your friends so you don't  drive alone, but I mean, it's a substantial drive from Berklee, and more so those days.  Yeah, it takes a full day.  Plus, you know, normally the weekend and part of the week and the evenings would be taken by the choirs. At that point it was directly… Yeah, it takes a full day. Plus, you know, normally the weekend and part of the week and the evenings would be taken  by the choir.  At that point he was directly in the scientific.  He had a good job.  Okay.  So that's that.  But again, you know, that's not so crucial, so I don't want…  I've talked this anecdote to many people, so I hope I'll still have a chance to correct  this.  Well, I mean, the book is going to contain the anecdote for which I have evidence of,  which is the one about Carnap.  Yeah, yeah.  Because I do have the lecture notes.  And you know, Professor Montague says that it's in the lecture notes.  So in the other…  But then I mean this hire in 1955. So he was hired more or less at the same time as  Carnap.  Carnap was hired at the beginning of the academic year, so 1954.  I see.  So Richard was hired not as a replacement of Eisenberg.  No, absolutely not.  It's hired as… and I don't know if this was discussed with Carnap when  he was hired, as part of a trend that maybe Kalish was trying to establish to create,  somehow to borrow the Berkeley model and make UCLA similar so you have philosophers with  a strong logical background that would look at philosophical issues with this kind of  perspective. So Carnap was his way to say, we lost Reichenbach, or their way probably was not just the young  Kehler, he was just an assistant professor at that time.  So it was his way to say, their way to say, look, we want to continue that tradition.  We lost Reichenbach, we get Carnap.  And probably, I don't know if it was part of the discussion of the full package, I'm  sure that Carnap must have said, you know, at least consider the fact that I really want  to teach those large intro courses at my age.  I mean, I don't know.  And in fact, if you look at the teaching schedule, he never taught those intro courses.  He taught other upper-division courses with few students or, in fact, I do have the schedule  there together.  That was very useful to see what Montague was teaching, what then later became their  textbook.  So they created… because when Montague arrived, I believe there was only one Intro to Logic.  And then he and Kehlich created the two layers and then later on they created the sequence  of three Logic courses.  I mean, I was there five actually.  Oh, really?  Okay.  But I think that what they created, they created a system in which all their majors, undergraduate  majors, have to take two.  Earlier on, I think there was only one that was required.  If then you want to major in a certain area of philosophy, you have to take three.  So you have to take the logic, one, thirty, three, and the lingua was one number that  was on top of the other, or thirty, it was like thirty-one and thirty-two, and then you  have to take another one. And then they create the sequence for graduate students as well. one number that was on top of the other of 30, it was like 31 and 32, and then you have  to take another one.  And then they create the sequence for graduate students as well.  So these were...  Now, Cardop, I think, was involved with the graduate students, but they tried to shield  him from like the...  In fact, in the early year, Montague...  The graduate culture, same.  Yeah, Montague taught some like intro to linguistic...  Oh, sorry, to philosophy, and then he taught philosophy of science, and then he taught the intro to  logic.  So, I think there was part of that package, like, well, we have this big name, we cannot  ask him, we need a younger person.  Oh, I can see Kerec, oh, we have a genius, they are at Berkeley, let's get him.  And so they got him as soon as possible.  And so I found the back and forth when they wanted to hire him, when Montague was  trying to stay at Berkeley as long as possible to finish working on the dissertation, but  at the same time, they want to say no to the job. That's the compromise that they found,  that he would arrive at the end of January 1955. So that's the thing that's part of it.  Thank you for telling me all this.  Very interesting.  I think we covered everything else.  I believe.  Let me double check since you have the list.  But in my mind, yes, the one about prior, I can ask you about that.  The study and then Lewis.  Yeah, I think.  Okay. So it's now close to one o'clock.  Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,

