SPEAKER_01: 0:00:00-0:01:09
 You would be adverse to a glass of wine?  I don't drink alcohol. I'm a strange Italian, I know, I know.  I don't drink alcohol. But feel free, if you want.  Yeah, yeah, no problem.  Yeah, feel free. Please don't have any problem.  I mean, I'm used to...  My husband loves me also for this reason,  because wherever we go, I'm the designated driver.  He says, I cannot enjoy wine with you, but at least I can drink wine.  I don't need to worry, because I have a driver in the family.  As I said, feel free.  I know that for people that drink, it's enjoyable before dinner.  There's an entire Italian tradition with that.  I'm familiar. Yeah, so I will also send you the...  Yeah, okay, I can also send you that.  It would be great if you had the electronic version, yeah.  And then I also send you the one that comes out.  Thank you.  Let me do that now.  I forget.

SPEAKER_00: 0:01:16-0:01:30
 All right. Right.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:00-0:02:09
 Okay, use that one. So you have been now for how long, half a year? In Bologna you mean?  Yeah.  I went there August, at the end of August.  Because the program, our students arrive in August for one month of Italian courses before

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:09-0:02:12
 the academic year starts.  Ah, I see.  So it's very long term.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:12-0:03:44
 Yeah, yeah.  So they'll be there until February the 3rd and then I go back to teaching this week.  Have you enjoyed it?  Yes.  I mean, it's, I mean Bologna is a very pleasant place.  There's been a very hot summer and then fall in terms of temperature.  It's very lively.  There are lots of students.  It's a very international, for Italian standards, very international.  There is a very nice mix.  And it's also very nice to see.  We have 69 students this semester from all UC campuses  to see how this experience can be, for some of them actually,  for a good number of them, transformative.  Some of them, it's the first time they leave the u.s  Some for a small number also first time they leave California and they need to adapt to a different academic system She said I said people who do year of water. So yes, I mean most of them do a semester  The year abroad is becoming more like, you know out of 69. We have 10 of them that do the year abroad is becoming more like you know out of 69 we have 10  of them that do the year abroad the others are just for the fall semester  and then we have 30 new students coming for the spring semester the number is  smaller just because remember you know with a quarter system there is an  asymmetry because the quarter the fall quarter is roughly can be matched into  the fall semester the problem is that if you are a student in  the quarter system, you have to come to Bologna from January until June, which counts for  a semester, but it counts for two quarters back where you are. And if you don't want  to stay behind with the exams, you need to take at least six, seven courses. That's too

SPEAKER_00: 0:03:44-0:03:46
 much in a semester.

SPEAKER_01: 0:03:46-0:04:11
 So that's why usually we have Berkeley students. Berkeley has the semester. So we have Berkeley  students coming in the spring. I see. So it's not just San Diego. You see  general… Yes. The only campus… around your time  there was the big change because I think when you started in 1965 UCLA  still had semester, yes. And it was 1968 maybe or 67 that they…

SPEAKER_00: 0:04:11-0:04:14
 I can tell you a story about that.

SPEAKER_01: 0:04:14-0:12:43
 Oh yeah, okay, so you experienced that. And there was across all UC campuses around that  time there was the change, except Berkeley. And the other exception is the last campus that they created in 1997, Merced.  So Merced adopted the semester system because they realized that it's easier to match with  other systems.  So those are the only two anomalies.  The reason why I remember this is that the academic year so the academic year 67 68 just the first  with the new quarter system and it meant that you had to everything had to... everything had to be finished about three weeks earlier than previously because  that had to do with wanting to have this full summer quarter.  And it meant in particular that you had to hand in your thesis also three weeks earlier.  Oh, okay. I mean, not that I know, but I sort of not really paid the right kind of attention to  it.  So in the end, although all the...  I may have told you this before too, but I wanted...  I actually had all the main results of my dissertation already by the spring of the year before  and decided I was not going to get my degree because then I would have had to  leave and I still had a year's full financial support and there was this logic year 67 68 and I didn't want to miss out on that  so I left all the stuff but it's only written up and then in the end I mean  the logic is very exact  so there was this period of 10 10 days think, where I may have slept a total of twenty hours or something like that.  I was really, really in bad physical shape at the end of it.  But I did sort of get it done just in time and it was really terrible.  Because some of the committee members hadn't even had a copy of the thing  and I actually held it, not me responsible, but Richard.  Richard was not entirely wrong because it was, I don't know if that's part of the story  I ever told you. I had terrible difficulty to get him to read what I had.  There was this very long probe,  which was the central part of the dissertation,  and I didn't dare to do anything  until he had sort of given his approval.  And so, I mean, I did this probably also  and told you at some point,  but I consider myself having been lucky with my supervisor in a way that hardly anybody ever could have been.  In that he allowed me, he actually liked me to be there when he did his own work.  And he wanted always to have somebody there as a kind of response and it just happened  at that time, these three years I was there, that there was nobody else who could have  taken that place.  He had no other graduate students, I mean at the very end I think he had a lot, but  and so he had had two who had both left the moment that I came all the way.  One was Cocchiarella and the other was a guy, Rudolf Greve.  Greve, yeah.  So Greve had already left.  I mean, I had to go over his apartment, in fact, when I came to UCLA in September of  1965. And Coquerel had left a little earlier, he had a job at what was then San Francisco State  College.  But he still had to, so he, while I was there this first semester, he came down to defend  his dissertation.  So there was, in that respect, a kind of vacuum and I was the only one to sort of sit in there.  So I was the one who would then call up and I would come up to the house and do some work there.  Very often we would then at some point say, you know, want a break and then we'd go to a coffee shop somewhere and continue. And it was also sometimes, but not very often, in his office.  But anyway, so on the whole, I mean it was in packages mostly, but on the whole I got an enormous amount of hand-on observation of how some way of that intellectual quality goes about  working on a book. And that is absolutely fantastic. But the dissertation actually was something that he had very little to do with.  I mean he knew what was going on more or less.  But it wasn't a problem that in the first semester,  I'd come with a very different project, so  usually something I'm going to do in the semester to close.  But in the first semester that I was there, I took an upper division course by Arthur  Pryor who happened to be just there as a visiting professor.  And in the course of that course, the question came up, and especially for me, that gave me the theme for the dissertation.  So I was lucky that I could still talk about that with Prior before he went back.  And then it took me from that moment about a year to get all the main results.  So that was in the middle of my second year.  The crucial idea, still we know very well, the crucial idea for this prophecy,  you know this theorem that since and until was, yeah, the Westbourne St. Nicholas Day, which is, for a Dutchman, very important, on 5th of December.  And I had been invited to dinner by Lee Lemon.  You know about Lemon, the logician, the subversion? What was his first name? He wrote a book on the introduction to logic, which was very much used in those days. John Lemon. I think came from Oxford and had, I cannot remember now whether he already had a permanent  position somewhere in California or it wasn't a point of taking it but he was not very old.  He had a heart attack on a trip to the mountain, I mean a walk, together with this American woman who, I think they  were already married at that point.  So that happened also while I was there, I think the first year.  It is hot and thick and tight, and so she was his widow and she invited me for dinner and I went there and it was quite  nice.  And then I went home and through this day I don't quite know whether that was the wrong  thing to do.  But anyway it was good for the work.

SPEAKER_00: 0:12:43-0:12:47
 Because you focused on the work.

SPEAKER_01: 0:12:47-0:12:52
 Because that's where I had this crucial idea.  Oh, that I see.

SPEAKER_00: 0:12:52-0:12:54
 A complicated crucial idea.

SPEAKER_01: 0:12:54-0:14:16
 You said December the 5th because it was St. Nicholas Day.  December.  December, yes, December the 5th.  And so we're talking about 1965 or 1966?  Certainly not 1965.  Because it would be too early because it was still…  Or 1967?  No, no, certainly not.  Could it have been 1965?  No, 1966.  1966, okay.  Just to get an understanding of the developmental, because also you took the seminar in fall 1965. Do you remember actually if Montague was attending prior seminar as well?  No.  No, okay.  Prior gave two courses. This was actually not a seminar, it was an upper division.  Oh, it was a course quarter vision upper division of course and he also gave a seminar which I did not take and that's something I regret to this day on  existence that is what gave rise to the book objects of thought oh so he  presented that in that seminar to UCLA. Yeah, so prior to that was an extremely important visit because, so the upper division course  on tensile actually was what became past, present and future.  Yes, exactly.  You know what I mean, like it was…

SPEAKER_00: 0:14:16-0:14:17
 The other seminar…

SPEAKER_01: 0:14:17-0:14:37
 I knew about this but I didn't know that the other, he taught another seminar which  was at the foundation of the…  Yeah, I think that Montague went to that.  I don't know.  I can't be sure.  So Montague was aware.  So you told him that you were inspired by a prior seminar.

SPEAKER_00: 0:14:37-0:14:38
 Oh, yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:14:38-0:15:09
 No, no, no.  So he was aware of it.  So that semester I didn't see Montague as much as I did on the following years, but I already  did and he was incredibly nice to me.  Actually, there's this longer story about how I arrived in Los Angeles, but he came  and fetched me from the airport and I spent a couple of weeks at this place before I could  move into this apartment which I also got by him.

SPEAKER_00: 0:15:09-0:15:10
 Because I was a student.

SPEAKER_01: 0:15:10-0:21:22
 You're right.  So it was quite easy.  I remember I was after colloquia with Pryor and I was walking and I was nice.  That's true because you had just arrived.  When Pryor was there you had just arrived. When Prior was there, you had just arrived  as well because that was the first semester, right?  Yeah.  Oh, what a...  Yeah. Right. I can't remember how we...  So you're talking about the development of the ideas. We're talking about that Montague  didn't feel that what you were working on was something that he had directly to contribute.  So you had this kind of hands-off.  I told Montague what I was doing and also I was pleased with myself when I had this  probe with this area and so forth.  And he knew very well what Pryor was doing.  And it was after all just the time that he himself also was very much  interested in dysphagia.  Just finished his dissertation and so yeah there was quite a bit of interaction between So I still remember that it was already in the spring of 68 that I finally got onto the  earth.  I had given up on trying to get him to read what I am.  And the Prophets all written up.  That was not the problem.  The writer at the end had to do with, in those days you had to find a typist and they would  actually type it all in the exact book of the exact regulations of the librarian. And  so it was actually a non-trivial additional task. I mean, I was already quite a few years later when  Irina Haim got her decision. Oh yeah, the story. Yeah, and then you have to...  Which means that you could not make changes or not changes easily, which  means that the version that you would bring to the typist has to be the final one. It's not like you know  Well, that was one thing but so in her case  The type is to knew the regulations apparently of the universe is it was in Stanford when she finished the dissertation  But she was a student at UMass  40  Also, I think I thought it was a miss she thought it was a mistake, she realized it was a mistake, she  wanted to make a correction.  No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,  no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, were the margins. The margins. I know, I know. So there was this perfectly typed dissertation and according to Stanford's  specification I said to Jean and I said no and so she had to get another type to get  the whole thing typed again.  So can I ask you what do you think that Montague was kind of like? Is it because he was, you know, he was  trusting you and therefore you don't feel there was like the need for him to  jump on checking that? Maybe he was busy in that period?  No, he was busy. So finally I got him to agree that we would go through this proof together.  Okay, that was the trick. So, finally in a couple of afternoons,  Okay.  I still remember one point  when I thought that I'd done something wrong.  And I sort of really felt unwell,  and I asked if we could go to the loo.  And sort of there I,  in the privacy of the space, I thought over there and I thought, no, it was all right.  And then I came back and the woman who asked said, are you right?  I said, yeah, I thought there was something wrong.  And he said, there was nothing wrong.  And I went on. But so there's one part of that interlude that I still sort of share this with me, the fact that the way you managed to convince  Montague was basically you guys were together, which made sense in the sense that he had  already done, you know, through you, he had presented to you ideas that he had, so clearly you were functioning  as an excellent catalyser. In other words, like, he would keep his attention together  and he would... Yeah, the catalysation has very little to do with the dissertation, but  with these... Yeah, no, and so probably what happened with the dissertation is that he  was able to go through your proof, because you may have triggered the same mechanism.  Okay, Hans is here, let's me focus on this task, I cannot do anything else, I had to do it,  probably there was also an issue of time, I guess you had to defend and, you know, without  his approval you could not defend, you could not send it to the typist. But who else was  in your, because you mentioned that some of the people that were in your committee were  not able to get the decision.  CC Chang.  Okay, CC Chang. He was particularly annoyed and He was not going to sign his document at the  end of the oral until I would have shown him that it was actually a dissertation. So it  was all quite painful. So then I think the next day I went with an actual physical copy to his office and it was sort of clear  that he was actually annoyed, of course with me, but in particular with Richard, because  Richard had to organize the oral and so forth.  Because the tradition would be that before your orals you would give your committee a

SPEAKER_00: 0:21:22-0:21:23
 dissertation.

SPEAKER_01: 0:21:23-0:23:38
 So the idea is that you were  there to discuss the dissertation with them. I presented the results but I had no chance to  check whether this was right. It was that profound but it was complicated enough for it not to be  directly visible that this could be true. And so I did actually, actually so CC did say yes he was he acknowledged he  was impressed by the result but I think it was actually good of him to refuse to  although it didn't make much difference because he couldn't read it.  Yeah, I'm joking.  He could trust it anyway.  He trusted at least Richard E. Duff as well.  But he was, yeah, that was not the right way to proceed.  And the others, yeah, it was quite a spectacular committee actually. So there was, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there, was there once was there so there is a youngest Moscow  Buckeyes oh yeah yes it's true he was already at UCLA yeah it was a very young  yeah yeah sure oh you had a lot of church in your community Wow  because he just arrived it's true, he had arrived in 1967. Yes, yes. Wow!  And there was David Kaplan.  You had David too?  Yes, he was not there and was replaced for the occasion.  Sorry, sorry, we were...  It's okay, okay, just finish your sentence.  I shall finish my sentence and he will watch that I not start a new one.  He was telling me all the wonderful people he had in his dissertation committee.  I mean, he has half of the history of logic in his dissertation committee.  That is actually...  I'm impressed. I mean, like, if you look at what you...  how much we can cover in terms of tradition, in terms of minds, I mean...  Yeah, yeah, yeah. So the person who replaced him on the journey was Harald Sobel?  Oh yes, yes, because he was still there, yes, because in 1968 he left UCLA, I think in 1969.  Remember there was all that story about him not getting tenure and Montague getting upset because of that.

SPEAKER_00: 0:23:38-0:23:40
 I remember writing a letter.

SPEAKER_01: 0:23:40-0:24:02
 Yeah, yeah, I found the letter, yeah. Oh yeah, yeah. I showed you the letter. Yeah, so that actually is connected  with something that I also must tell you as part of.  Remember, you cannot start a new sentence, though.  You cannot finish because otherwise  we're gonna be panicked.  I managed to stop Hans.  He was about to start a new sentence.  I said no.

SPEAKER_00: 0:24:02-0:24:03
 I was already halfway.

SPEAKER_01: 0:24:03-0:24:06
 Yeah, yeah, but I had to.

