HK: 0:00:00-0:00:05
 I mean very different from what I remember because I think I told you I...

IC: 0:00:05-0:00:09
 Well you encountered them when the father was originally in his decline.

HK: 0:00:09-0:00:19
 When I came along with Richard a couple of times because they had this joint apartment complex that the parents were running.

IC: 0:00:19-0:00:21
 In the San Fernando Valley right down in his house.

HK: 0:00:21-0:00:23
 In the San Fernando Valley, exactly.

IC: 0:00:23-0:00:27
 So you did actually see those?  (Yeah, yeah.) I don't know that. So you did actually see those? (Yeah, yeah).  I didn't know that.  So you were able, you saw them?

HK: 0:00:27-0:00:30
 I talked a little bit with Edgar, but only twice I think.

IC: 0:00:30-0:00:35
 In that place?  So you even saw the place?  (Yeah, yeah, yeah.)  Because the place still exists.  You know, I drove there, it still exists.

HK: 0:00:35-0:01:27
 I remember we had been working together, we were still going to, Richard would say "I have to go and see my parents." And so they looked already, especially Monte, they looked sort of old and not quite,  I mean, not really senile,  but very, very different from the way they come across on the photograph.  And so what you said makes sense of the photograph and the  photograph sort of supports what you're saying that she was quite a remarkable  person and he looks very attractive in that picture. You can see that she would have fallen for him, although he didn't have all that much by way of position or actually goods to bring him home.

IC: 0:01:29-0:09:13
  Well, I mean, like if you... One thing to keep  in mind is that I think she was really looking for some kind of independence in the sense that  she did not need money because she had... I mean, she was not wealthy in the sense that then  the property was divided among the sisters,  but the mother gave her some money  that was probably the money that they started,  what they used to start.  (What you say, she had status.)  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And that's what, you know, she had a sense of herself,  like, because at the beginning,  when they first moved to Stockton for the first job,  so right before Montague, it was 1927, so Montague was born three years later, they were living in a very modest house. I think it's called a duplex. So Montague's parents, they were...  (That brought them with them also.) Well, actually, Monte's parents are the ones that moved to California when Monte was young.  Monte was born in Vermont, but then very little they moved to California.  And so Monte grew up in California, went to school in California, very close to Santa Barbara,  and then, you know, in the outskirt of Santa Barbara, and then he started working right there.  And then he went into the marine for one or two years in the area, so  Monte essentially is Californian. But his family, the parents were the one that moved from Vermont probably looking for a better situation  They were poor peasants in Vermont  I mean like typical little land and I could see from the census all these children and so they have to move to find  so and probably I guess by land and I could see from the census all these children and so they have to move to find.  So and probably I guess by working and like that's how they you know start working in  the phone company the new town where Lorraine was living needed this kind of work and you  know probably that's how they met.  But on the other end remember there was this issue that they knew each other,  they met young. I mean, Lorraine must have been 19. He was four years older than her.  So he was 23 and they got married almost right away. When Richard was born, Lorraine was  36. His father was 40.  And I know for sure that Lorraine is Richard's biological mother because I have the birth  certificate.  She went to a hospital to be birthed, which was unusual.  It was for fancy, you know.  Again, since they were living in this very modest duplex, the money was not coming from  them.  The money was coming from Lorraine's mother for sure that paid for the hospital they paid you know this is  the grandchild that is born after many many years.
  
  And I think I told you the  story like that was something suspicious to me that I was trying to understand  and it was only later that I was able to put the pieces together because of some  of the material that I found in that box of lost documents where there was these letters  from this guy that was talking to Montague like "oh Richard it has  already been one year that you left" us he had moved he found a job at UCLA" so  we're talking about 1956 "it was already one year that you left us we miss you so  much yesterday was my birthday Lorraine was very nice she came here", so Lorraine was in Stockton and this guy was living in San  Francisco. Lorraine's, oh sorry sorry Lorraine at that point was in Oakland because  that's where they where when Richard was at Berkeley. "So Lorraine came over we spent the day together it was really really nice she cooked for me."  Letter from Lorraine "Richard remember..." it's I'm trying to remember if maybe it  was Bob his name was Bob too, "...this is Bob's birthday. Please remember to, you know, send him a card. He's always so nice with you. You know that he really likes that."
  
  So this kind of, and then I reconstruct, Bob and Monte met when they were doing the marine service together. That's how they met. And Monte met when they were doing the marine service together. That's how they met. And they remained friends. And the cousin, Montague's cousin, a few years older,  that I was able to interview a few years ago in Santa Cruz, she told me, "Yes, I  remember they were coming to visit the farm." She was growing up with her parents  in the farm. "And the friend was always together. Like, he was cooking for them when we returned the visit. So he was cooking for all of we returned the visit so was cooking for all of us he would come with them to visit us and I remember that I was a teenager",  Montague was 10 she was 14, "and you know Lorraine was talking to my mom and said 'what a wonderful guy was and so on' and I thought it would be strange that a  married woman..." Yeah yeah! I think they were all very well aware of what was going on and Lorraine, of  course, was the one that was controlling that. 
  
  So I mean, to me this was particularly telling.  I don't care about the gossiping part.  What I care is it shows that Richard really grew up in an environment which the outside,  Stockton was Stockton, was, you know, this kind of very conservative place.  But within his family, there were dynamics because of the mother.  They were not the standard one, not the usual one.  There was more openness, more flexibility.  They may also explain some obvious way of endorsing, envisioning the world around him and himself with respect to that. And definitely this very strong connection between  mother and son  in these letters that they were writing to each other.  I mean, I only got the Lorraine's letter because that's the one that Richard received where she talks about  everything. She talks about how nice Bob,  Bob, like this Bob, Richards partner is, because Richard has won a scholarship in New Mexico so that summer it was in New  Mexico for the scholarship in this kind of seminar.

Yeah so this was ready for  actually this was probably right before it was summer 1962 and then I think in fall 1962 is when Richard came on sabbatical.

HK:
 I never knew about this, this Mexico stuff. 
 
IC:
 It was this, and I'm trying to remember, you also produced a paper out of it, I think it  is on the notion of determinism in physics, that's where the paper came from.  I see.  So it was one of these grants that the military used to give in those years, where you could  put together people with very different backgrounds.  There were mathematicians, there were logicians,  but there were also economists.
 
HK:
 And this was in Mexico City?
 
IC:
 No, no, no. It was Albuquerque, I believe.  (Oh, in New Mexico!)  New Mexico, sorry, sorry.  No, no, no, New Mexico, Albuquerque.  It was Albuquerque.  So in Albuquerque, he spent like six, seven weeks there,  or a couple of months,  because the fellowship required them to be together at this institute. They would pay for everything, they were supposed to, I was able to find actually a couple of guys  that were there, one of them was actually  the one that was the editor of the volume.  So they were willing to share their memories about,  like the idea would be that we would brainstorm,  but actually we really had very little in common. And he has some vague memory of Montague as somebody who would  be on his own.  But so he spent those two months in there and Lorraine and Monte came to LA to fix things  at the house.  This is not the one that you saw but the previous one, the one on Beverly Glen where Bob then remained until he died in 2012.  And so they spent a week with him. Monte was fixing things in the house  and Lorraine was taking care of the kitchen, cooking together with Bob.  And she writes to Richard, "Bob is such a nice guy, we had a very nice time, Monte is doing this,  I'm cooking with Bob.  Bob is such a nice guy, you should be really nicer with your friend."  Like in the letter, it's really like, you see this kind of dynamic in the family that really opens a different window.  Anyway, sorry, I could go on for hours.  Please take your time.

HK: 0:09:13-0:09:27
 So thanks for these questions that sort of, you could think about a little bit.

IC: 0:09:27-0:10:56
 And, Hans, if you don't mind, would you mind starting about the part about you?  Yeah.  And let me tell you why I asked you those questions. Yeah.  It's because I'm thinking about how to present, like, I thought that it would be more useful rather than, you know, say,  "okay, this is what happens in 64, this is what happens in 65."  I want to create a list for people for which I have enough material.  I want to create profiles.  So, in other words, when you enter the story, it's not because, "okay, 1965 Hans arrives."  And then, 1960, no.  So, when I introduce you, you become part of the story. And of course your story is a story related to Richard. And it's important for me to get a sense of like, from a certain point of view, looking at the profile of the students that work with Richard, yours, and I'm not giving an evaluation, but yours is the more peculiar.  You were in Europe.  You were really working in a kind of intellectually stimulating group and you made a huge change.  Also you met Richard like three years before that change.  So there is a story there and I think it will be interesting, if you're willing to share,  to understand because I think that may say something about Richard so why---of course something about you too, of course---but why, what happened in 1962? How did you interact with impression that you  have why did you decide then to continue working with him?

HK: 0:10:56-0:12:20
 It is an unusual story not particularly exciting but one would not think of it if one hadn't been told it. First, that might be of some use.  It's coming out I think next year but it's already online somewhere. I was asked to do, I don't know if you've ever heard of it,  there's the Annual Review of Linguistics. (Sure, sure.) So they invite, it's all on invitation, and they occasionally invite people for a little autobiography. I did that and it was hard work, it was sort of fun too, but it was hard work mostly because it had to be fairly short. It was 8500 words and most of the time I spent shortening what I had already written. And so the actual thing, I will send that to you also if you want to. (Sure, definitely!) There is actually very little about my own history but an earlier version which I have here has a little bit on how I came to go to Amsterdam. I'll say, I'll tell you more but I can give you...

IC: 0:12:20-0:12:28
 Oh definitely, yeah, thank you! Thank you very much. So this is I was about to ask you when you said "I had to shorten it", I hope you kept the longer version!

HK: 0:12:28-0:16:44
 Yeah, yeah, yeah. There is even more material somewhere, but that's probably not relevant.  Anyway, so this tells a little bit about the story, how, well, from my birth to when I went to UCLA, which is not much, but it says a little bit about  how... what made me go to this new institute at Better Just Third Ground(13:10,???) founded in Amsterdam, so perhaps I should start with that.

IC:
 Yeah, I think that would be a good way to start.
 
HK:
 And then we can go on to how I ended up in UCLA.  So I was born on an island to the north of Holland, one of these string of islands along the Dutch and then German coasts  and sort of going up along the Danish coast a little. And as very early on as I was born in during the Second World War, and so at that point Holland was already under German occupation. And my father was mayor of that island at the time and didn't want to continue that because he had to collaborate with the Germans. So he quit that job and took a job that didn't require that kind of connivance with the occupying forces. That was an administrative job, he was a jurist by training, which was being director, president of a corporation, state-run corporation, that had for its task the upkeep of  dikes and roads in this part of the Netherlands. There's in particular one  dike, it's sort of a break in the dunes, like that hole that goes all  the way from the top of Hitland to Biarritz (15:04???) basically, or certainly up to Normandy. It's mostly protected  by dunes and this particular point's a little, about 10 kilometres north of the place where I grew up. There is a big gap and so until the late  Middle Ages it was actually a total area. It was sort of pretty much a mess of inlets from the sea  and then and and and lakes and marshes and so forth and they started reclaim already quite early on but that meant building a  dike to close that gap and that was one of the main defenses against the sea so that was the main  project or the main task of this corporation and there were also other dikes that were providing second protection and roads on them. So that's the job he got  and that's why we moved to the place where I grew up.  I see. I see.  So we moved already in 1942 but then during the later parts of the war we were moved to  another... so this is the village where I grew up grew up, between the town where this office was  of my father and the sea basically.  We were moved away from there, evacuated during, I can't remember, I think 1943-45, because  it was all part of the German defence line.  So we went to a place on the other side of the town.  My earliest memories are of that place.  And then in the summer of 45 we moved back to this village called Perchen.  So that's actually where I grew up.  I was four.

IC: 0:16:44-0:16:45
 And you went to school there?

HK: 0:16:45-0:16:59
 I went to school, yeah, in that village.  There was an anthroposophic Steiner school that had just been set up.  I was the sixth student of that school.

IC: 0:16:59-0:17:02
 They just opened it?

HK: 0:17:02-0:17:22
 Well, the year before, or half a year before.  Anyway, so it was very small to start with,  but it's now actually very well established.  Not only is it a primary school, but also a sort of,  what do you call it?

IC: 0:17:22-0:17:24
 Middle or high school.  Middle or high school.

HK: 0:17:24-0:17:24
 Yeah, there's no middle,

IC: 0:17:24-0:17:27
 in the whole of Kedok, it's just high school? Middle or high school. There is no middle. Oh, you have an entry and then you are hired.  Just high school.  It seems to be quite flourishing.

HK: 0:17:27-0:17:59
 But, yeah, so I went there and then that was only a primary school and then went to a sort  of classical gymnasium in this nearby town where my father also had his office.  And so then at the end of that I quit university and I wanted to become a theoretical physicist.  So I went to...

IC: 0:17:59-0:18:04
 Okay, so before going to university you already had this interest and this desire.

HK: 0:18:04-0:19:26
 Yeah, so I for a long time didn't quite know what I was doing.  Actually I did sort of, there was a scientific branch and also a humanist branch and that  made it possible for me to get an Abitur in both of these.  But then by the time that I was going to leave high school it wasn't really clear to me that I wanted to do physics.  And so I went to the university where my father had also been, it was Langdon, not a bad choice.  And I did sort of the preparatory work, did a bachelor's degree in mathematics, or physics and mathematics.  And while I was there, I met somebody who was also a day in mathematics and  physics, and this is not much of a difference.  He was one year ahead of me as a man by the name of Dick DeYoung.  I don't know if you've come across him.  He was really a mathematical magician.  He became that and did a PhD under Kleene in Wisconsin medicine.  Then came back to Amsterdam and eventually got a professorship for the last few years.  And he's still around. And I, a couple of years I took. Oh, that young then.

IC: 0:19:26-0:19:33
 Ah, okay, okay, I see his name.  And as I said, I know him as a logician, a mathematical engineer, that's cool.

HK: 0:19:33-0:20:51
 So we became already very good friends in Leiden,  and he knew about this Institute of Berths.  In fact, his father who was, I think he was a doctor and I think  was for a while also Beds general physician. So his father and Beds knew  each other quite well and Dick knew about this whole thing via his father and had already, much earlier than I, decided  that's where I wanted to continue.  And he told me about it and I thought I'd seen these people in line disappear in the  Institute of Theoretical Physics and never came out.  So I thought, okay, maybe I should give myself a chance  to do something else before I devote myself completely to this thing. And so I went  along with him, so we went together in 1961, it was, from Lagen to Amsterdam and we did pretty much everything together.  We followed the same courses.

IC: 0:20:51-0:21:02
 So you formally transferred then?  So in other words, you went from the University of Leiden to the University of Amsterdam as  a transfer student?  No, I wasn't going there.  Oh, you were not so formal.

HK: 0:21:02-0:21:10
 You could go there and take it. So this degree that I got is something that is actually complete in itself.

IC: 0:21:10-0:21:20
 And then you can transfer it to other institutions.  You can take it anywhere you like.  Okay, I see. Was the degree that you got in Leiden a prerequisite for you to join the institute in Amsterdam?

HK: 0:21:20-0:21:54
 No, I don't think so. I didn't think it never came up. I mean, I couldn't have become a  graduate student without having such a…  I see. I see. Okay.  …coddy dance.  I see. I see. It was the title that you needed.  The actual subject matter or not, I'm not sure. I mean, having had mathematics  with me was helpful, but it was strictly speaking an institute as part of  the philosophy faculty, so I can't imagine that they could have imposed such a requirement  even if it was very sensible.

IC: 0:21:54-0:22:11
 So, do you remember the impression that you had of, like, I guess the environment was,  the kind of experience that you were having was significantly different from the one in  Leiden. Because now you join a group where there is a leading figure that, you know, has a certain kind of interest.

HK: 0:22:11-0:22:51
 I mean, education at European universities, I don't know what you experienced when you were much younger,  but in those days it was actually very badly organized and so there were lessons courses and it was all very anonymous  and you got occasionally a little bit of a contact with the assistants of the  professors who did the exercise sessions but that was about it and then you saw the  professor only when you went for it doing this sort of oral exam.  Yep, yep.  Familiar.  Oh yeah, very familiar.  I mean, everything was really terrible.

IC: 0:22:51-0:23:04
 And office hours, like, you know, the famous...  I mean, you would stop by and see if by any chance the professor was in the office and  was willing to talk to you.  But there was no, like, regular office hours.

HK: 0:23:04-0:23:38
 I actually never went into any of these. We sort of understood what the stuff was that you had to know and I did go to the lectures, so I had a pretty good idea in most cases of what the subject was about.  How large was that group? Like how many in the answer?  Oh, that was totally different.  I mean, the Institute, it was a bit like my primary school.  When Dick and I were pretty much the only students, I think we were the only students  in that year.

IC: 0:23:38-0:23:54
 Okay, so sorry, the interaction that you are talking about was the interaction that you  had in Leiden where there was interaction.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I was about to say, I thought there was a more personal interaction in the institute.  Okay, okay, now I remember.  I was a little bit surprised, like really? I thought there was kind of...  You had a personal interaction with Beth, and that's what I thought.

HK: 0:23:54-0:25:21
 Totally different.  And so, yeah, these lectures...  So, to be a graduate student, like it's still in the US, you have to do a certain number  of coursework and actually there too you have to pass exams over the material covered in  those courses.  And basically that was all that was required.  So the degree that you ended up with was something called Doctoral and it corresponds, it was  more stuff, but it corresponds more to a Masters than to a PhD.  You did have to write a thesis, but my thesis was just sort of reconstructing all the probes in a famous paper by Tarski called The Theory of Reductive Systems.  So, I mean, I learned a lot from it and it was not true, of course the paper has no prob to see how some of these procedures go, but that was basically it.  And I think I may have made some general comments on what the point of this might be, but there's very little of that.  So it's not really a PhD, so it's a PhD can't later.

IC: 0:25:21-0:25:27
 So what kind of courses do you take?

HK: 0:25:27-0:26:00
 Well, the subject itself was called philosophy but it was really in this institute of mathematical  logic and foundations of science that involved a course on scientific methodology. I think we did this book by Nagel.  And then there was one course on,  basically, I mean, I knew no logic at that point.

IC: 0:26:00-0:26:04
 So it was sort of-  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  There was no introduction to logic, yeah.  Proposition of being a good watcher.

HK: 0:26:04-0:26:13
 And we did that by this book called, entitled Four Methods by Bette, So it's a... Yeah, yeah. There was a... It was a... Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.

default: 0:26:13-0:26:14
 Propositional opinion.

HK: 0:26:14-0:29:46
 Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion.  Propositional opinion. Propositional opinion. Propositional opinion. Propositional opinion. Propositional opinion. book and his first really smooth presentation of the semantic tableau technique.  Wow.  And that I'm still very, very grateful that I was trained in one click that way because  semantic tableaus has this extraordinary quality that it is on the one hand, yeah, a method  of proof and at the same time it sort of, yeah time it's based on the idea that when you  want to prove something you want to try and construct a counter example and if the system  is such that your construction method doesn't succeed then that means that the conclusion does fall from the premises.  In the other case, if it doesn't, then you will in the end get a counter-model.  So that marriage of semantics and truth theory, I think, makes it actually very special if  you look at all these other kinds of systems.  I mean, I'm not a professor of logic.  And so that was, then there was a course, I'm trying to think, there was a course by that that I sort of history of logic that I said in  what I the two things that I mentioned so far were actually things that I had  to pass an exam and I also had to do one course with a man he would be quite  famous among the name of all the world's it was a meaning literally old world, it just fitted completely.  So he was a more traditional philosopher and I did an exam with him on Bergson, my German memoir,  and a book by his philosopher Zimmer, the German philosopher from the beginning of the 20th century which I didn't like at all.  I didn't like Martin Riemann very much also. I got a very good mark for this exam. And what else?  What other courses did I have?  I can't remember exactly what was part of an exam with a centre mark, but we did a lot  of project research. was part by way of an exam with a sentiment but we did a lot of sort of  project research it was better to project it was financed from Euroturm  that was at the time this thing of the six of the European community. Was it called at this time?  Yeah, you know what I mean. France, Germany, Italy, and the Benelux.  Anyway, so they had...  So Erdem was this attempt at the time to develop it was a good energy it was it wasn't a call like

IC: 0:29:46-0:29:51
 them I think they were using did weren't they using the word community like no

HK: 0:29:51-0:30:10
 no even there was something called the European society of community of coal and steel.

IC: 0:30:10-0:30:29
 Oh, okay, so that's the predecessor, because it was a series of arrangements and agreements for exchanges, like more on the economic side, I see. Right, exactly. And so one big concentration, they already saw that, was the question of how to provide

HK: 0:30:29-0:30:46
 for the kind of energy, the kind of energy that the coal would run out.  And so nuclear power was a really big issue.  And so they had set up, I don't know if you know, have you ever been to Ispra?

IC: 0:30:46-0:30:53
 Yeah, yeah.  So that's when they created the centre in Ispra, which is still there.

HK: 0:30:53-0:30:58
 Yeah, I know. I have not been back since those days.

IC: 0:30:58-0:31:05
 So you guys were directly involved in this project then?  So not only were you taking courses, but then you became some sort of assistant?

HK: 0:31:05-0:32:56
 Well, so the story is this, as far as the IBM 1790, no it was 37th, I can't remember  the exact specification but it was the largest and it was very, very, very expensive.  And it was already true in those days, perhaps even more than it is now, that every day such a computer doesn't do anything.  I mean, the amortization is so enormous, a tremendous waste of time, and they had counted on this reactor becoming critical at a certain time. and there was a power black station here in Stuttgart.  So this computer was sitting there doing nothing  and so the people in charge wondered  how they could give it things to do.  And one thing, and I don't know exactly  how the details of how this deal was made,  was that they got in touch with Bette or vice versa.  So that Bette would provide this computer with tasks in proof theory.  Just because otherwise it would have been so unhappy.  So there were a number of such projects.  This was one of them.  I remember this was very shortly after I got So there were a number of such projects. This was one of them.  So very shortly after I got Mamsun in this first year, I got a kind of assistantship  paid for from this project.

IC: 0:32:56-0:33:04
 So this was the big advantage for Bert.  So for him it made sense to accept this because he would be provided with money that could

HK: 0:33:04-0:33:42
 use as support.  I had two collaborators, a bit-arbeiter, whatever you call it, paid for by the university for  his job and they did most of the teaching, maybe even three, but they had a lot more  people, I think four or five, five. Dick was also paid from this,  who all got paid from this project.  And it was great because it made it go up.  I was really part of something for the first time in my life.  And I got on with the people very well.  And...

IC: 0:33:42-0:33:48
 Which meant, Anstead, that you and Dick, you had to be physically in

HK: 0:33:48-0:34:09
 Ispra. Well, we went there, I think, I don't know if it was more than one time, but we did go there one time to present our stuff and to see what it was like and to see what was coming out of this computer also. One shouldn't forget with these things that that was long before the Internet.

IC: 0:34:09-0:34:23
 Yeah, yeah, sure. Believe me, I know that very well.  I grew up without Internet, so I know what you're talking about.  Anyway, so...  And roughly as far as time is concerned, so we are 1960...

HK: 0:34:23-0:34:36
 So, Dick and I went to Amsterdam in the fall of  61 okay okay and this was in the course I think of that first academic years

IC: 0:34:36-0:34:46
 62 it was a good someone to spring anyway so in the program was a two-year program? You couldn't put...

HK: 0:34:46-0:34:49
 The master?  Yeah, the academic...  Oh, it was open and flexible.

IC: 0:34:49-0:34:53
 Yeah, I see.  Yeah, yeah, you could take pretty much as long as you wanted.

HK: 0:34:53-0:36:07
 As long as you wanted, okay.  And so, Dick took three and I took four, so he had to leave again.  And so that was really sort of hazy exactly.  Apart from these three exams I just mentioned,  the exams they had to do towards this degree,  as far as the main part was concerned.  But actually the more demanding parts were,  he had auxiliary, I think he digged to,  auxiliary subjects, mathematics and physics, and had to pass the exams for the main courses they were offering there.  So that was actually quite challenging. It was a course on differential equations that even the full-time mathematicians would fail in enormous numbers.

IC: 0:36:07-0:36:18
 Who was teaching that course? So you guys were taking that in the mathematics department?  Yes.  Ah, okay, okay. It was not offered in the institute.  No, no, no.  It was part of the curriculum, you had to go to a different, like,

HK: 0:36:18-0:36:37
 I can't remember now. Yeah, I guess I'll see the man in front of them. The name will come to me if I meet him.  They will talk to that cause.  I just want you...  Oh, yeah, this is...  Oh, I can take a break.  All right, I'm sorry.  Let me...  Okay, so he is calling you.

default: 0:36:38-0:36:38
 Yeah.

