HK: 0:00:00-0:12:28
The first year was 68, 69, the second year was 69, 70. So I guess it was the very end of 69, beginning of 70. It was sort of, I can't remember exactly, but it was sort of around during the break. So Christmas, New Year. I may have actually, I can't remember exactly but that overlapped, it was just the beginning of the year. Anyway, so I'm pretty sure, I can't remember, but it was sort of the default of staying with him. And we were sort of trying to, wanting to know what he'd been doing. He also wanted to know a little bit about what I'd been doing. And this was after, I hope this fits the timetable, after this whole Angela Davis thing. 
 
IC:
Oh yeah yeah yeah
 
HK:
So I asked him also about that. I never really met her, I mean, I may have seen her once in the department before. But so I don't really know her. But the whole business was international news at that point.

And he said, "Yeah, well..." It was something like "Yeah, I'm not a judge of her intellectual qualities, but this is a matter of principle." So we all stood by her and he was entirely in support of this which of course is different from thinking that she was doing useful philosophy. But, so just in support of what you were saying, he certainly was among the people in the department, I don't know of any exceptions, who entirely endorsed this department's decision to stand by that.

IC:
Yeah, the only one that may not have been North based on, I mean, again, I don't have direct evidence of that.
By the way, when you met with Richard, probably he was in the midst of the big clash with Kalish because of the file.


HK:
Could well be, he never mentioned that.

IC:
Which is, you know, despite all this, he was able to make the point that, you know, "Although I know that Kalish is behind her hire, I recognize her intellectual quality, except that that's not the direction in which I want to go."
The only person that may have not, because I think my, if I remember, I have all the files and I talked to Kaplan about this, but so what happened at a certain point is that Davis was prevented from receiving a salary, from being rehired and being paid, despite number one, the contract that she had, and number two, the fact that there was no power for... Because this famous claim by the...

So we're talking about the time when the governor of California was Ronald Reagan. And he put pressure on the Board of Regents to claim that no public official of California could have been or could be a member of the Communist Party. This was claimed to be a law, but the law did not exist. So that was the big falling apart of that legal case and that's why in the end she was restated because there was no legal basis for that. But for one year she received no salary. And so there was a what UCLA faculty did voluntarily gave part of their salaries so, but that was a volunteer act. I have no direct evidence that Montague did or did not. My understanding is that he did. He participated to that.

HK:
I couldn't imagine that he wouldn't have.

IC:
Yeah. The only person that I believe did not do that, at least the only person relevant for us that did not do that, was Alonzo Church. Alonzo Church also was involved in a case that probably was the department worked around to avoid an escalation of the case, given the figure and the profile that of... I mean, I never met Alonzo Church, so you know him. So what happened, these are the facts that I was able to reconstruct: I believe in the office, the office of the philosophy department, some people including the black secretary had put a poster or an image or something concerning the black liberation movement, black rights and so on. One day Alonzo Church came to the department, saw that and got unusually upset. It doesn't sound like it was typical of him. And he went and...


HK:
Tore it off the wall!

IC:
Yes, off the wall saying, "What is this doing here? This is a philosophy department." This was reported, was reported to the chair. And that's where... Notice, the chair that at that time must have been probably Montgomery. They decided to engage with the staff and talk to Alonzo Church rather than bring in the case. But we do have letters and discussion with the faculty meeting of this episode that confirm the story that she told me. Based on this, I believe that… And I do know that Alonzo Church, together with Richard Montague, were probably not the only ones, but were among the minority that voted against the hiring of Andrew D.
 
 HK:
Originally.

 IC:
Originally. That was a purely intellectual discussion about about "is this the kind of philosophy that we want to endorse?" So for sure, Montague, for sure, Church, I believe another one or two votes against and the other were in favor.STOPPEDHERE
 But that's different from the other.
 So that's a different story.
 So that fits with the picture of Montague keeping the two levels very separate.
 There is an issue concerning intellectual choices, what kind of people, what kind of philosophy we want to do.
 And then there is an issue about intellectual capacities.
 And third, an issue about racial discrimination.
 And the anecdote in the way Kalish was telling the story years later was a kind of, you know, the memory can act as a way to relieve pain or relieve regrets that you have.
 To me, it sounds totally like that.
 Like there was something in Kalish that felt bad about the way he behaved towards Richard, maybe even towards black people, for certain aspects.
And so the story is a way to...
clearly, the story is told in a way that makes Montague shine and Kalish is diminished by making a claim without really understanding.
And notice the context also.
He's talking to Anita Feferman.
 They knew each other, but they were no friends.
 So it's not like my best friend, my best buddy.
 And he knew that this would be recorded.
 There was a recorder there with the old tapes.
 So he knew that that would be recorded.
 And then he stayed.
 And he wanted to go on record.
 He wanted to go on the records.
 And he was already, Anita confirmed that he was already sick.
And then David told me that his sickness went go on the record.
And he was already, Anita confirmed that he was already sick and then David told me that his sickness went on for a while so he was not teaching anymore.
 So you are at the end of your life essentially, you feel it.
 And here there is somebody who allows you to tell a story about that past.
 Of course, you know, I wish that the university had kept his material, but there's no archive.
 There's none, right.
 No, no.
 I mean, but you know, I can only imagine the kind of letters that they must have exchanged at a certain point, especially when Montague was still in Berkeley and Kalish was already in LA and how that changed over time.
 It would have been a beautiful window inside also Richard's emotional space with somebody he trusted fully, which is kind of rare.
 But you know, that's the limit of writing biographies.
 You work with what you have.
 And I think we are already lucky to have enough of what Montague did intellectually to be as faithful as possible to that and that to me is really important exciting aspect of the enterprise I was hoping to be able to get a sense of not just the ideas that he had but how he developed those ideas and I think I got there I feel comfortable about it and And then at the same time I didn't want these ideas to be ideas coming from a computer.
It was a human being.
 So how did that human being that was able to produce those ideas, the effect? What kind of human being was behind it? What kind of, you know, from a certain point of view, if you think about, you know, intellectual ideas I think view if you think about you know intellectual ideas I think played a very important role in Richard's life they were probably the area where he felt the most under control he did not fear them he was fearless for certain aspects he loved to play with ideas, to see where ideas go, to be extremely critical and fight for ideas, to be totally empowered.
And that's something that probably...
Remember last night, I kept thinking about the remark that you made about, I thought that Bob was exploiting him.
And probably there was a component of that.
I told you about all the things that Montague was buying, the box that I found, all the things that montague was buying or that you know the box that i found all the checks they were like bailed for pants for bob dance class for bob and this for bob but probably bob was a human being that in his own special way contorted and complex he had a very troubled childhood i mean it was not an easy life the one that bob had showed affection genuine affection for mean, it was not an easy life, the one that Bob had.
Showed affection, genuine affection for who Richard was.
 Not because he could understand who he was intellectually, but as a human being.
 And when you're so desperate and lacking that experience, because as a little kid you have been mistreated.
 You know, mommy and daddy, okay, fine.
 But then beyond that, you have been bullied.
 And the only way that you have been bullied and the only way that you have to protect yourself is to be on top and you know find somebody who is willing to be with you, that is sharing a space with you, is living with you, it doesn't matter how much you have to fight, that's somebody who is there for you or not at all.
So as far as these two sides are concerned, that we also talked about quite a bit already yesterday, bringing up again how these things, both these trips to Old River Boulevard and also other things they really felt to me as a kind of break out of that other side of him sort of when this system of control sort of relaxes, then something quite unexpected can happen.
 And it is a very small anecdote.
 So after these seminars of his, a small group would usually go out for dinner and so, I can't remember how it was, it was very often there were several people in one car and some other people in another car.
And there was one occasion where it was after a seminar where he had been as as brilliant and controlled as he normally was.
 And we went to this restaurant

SPEAKER_01: 0:12:28-0:12:51
 and Richard broke out in a diatribe against somebody working in the restaurant.
 It was absurd.
 It was totally insulting.
working in the restaurant, it was absurd.
 It was totally insulting and utterly unjustified.

SPEAKER_00: 0:12:55-0:31:20
 And he always stood there until it was over.
And then he went into the back.
 And so Barry Smith and his friend, he was also part of this group, you must probably have come across him, Lung Ok Chak.
 Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, sure, sure, I contacted him.
 You did? Yeah, yeah.
 Okay.
 And one other person was there, me and Richard, and I can't remember who was driving maybe.
And so at a moment, it was just before we got into the car, he said, Roland just can't be rational all the time.
 And it's sort of summarizing, it's a total contrast.
 I think that was his dimension.
 But that also shows the amount of energy that he was going into that act of performance when he was teaching.
 And that probably was totally unconscious.
 It was so mechanical for him, but that doesn't mean that it was costless.
 You pay a fee.
And, like, yeah, related to this, I didn't finish telling, when we were talking about black and how careful he was on campus, the very same secretary told me that, you know, Richard was quite open with her and she knew that, first of all, he was gay and they had you know Because they were joking about black guys.
Okay, and so and What happened is that one day? One of her cousins came to stop by was usually one of the one of her cousin the secret I was causing a black guy young black guy good looking, came to say hi to her and just happened that Montague passed by and says hi to her.
So the young guy, her cousin, the secretary's cousin, sees Richard.
And then when Richard is gone and later actually outside the office, she says, he asked me, but who is that guy? Oh, there's a very important professor in that department.
His name is Richard Modica.
Ah, okay.
No, because I was on Malibu or the beach area at one of the restrooms and there was him that made a step towards me.
 And I just said, go away.
And he left, if you don't bother me.
 I just say, go away.
 And he left, if you don't mind.
 So, you see that completely, like, so there's no evidence.
 Nobody has ever told me that Richard behaved on campus in a way that was not just perfectly acceptable, impeccable, towards the students, towards even, like, in particular, graduate students really liked him like especially because they were coming from probably impressions of him from maybe colloquium talks where he could be very aggressive and then in in the class it would be available you could go and talk to him in the office hours more than one person told me i was the first time i went to talk to him i was so frightened like that he would just basically destroy me criticize me and actually said oh no actually you know you should read this and then maybe you can come back and tell me so there was this kind of behavior impeccable and perfect and then a very different behavior outside which was also what this gay people were mainly condemned to it there was no other and in Richard of course I think reached an extreme level because the two dimension were extreme on the one hand mainly condemned to it.
There was no other.
And in Richard, of course, I think reached an extreme level because the two dimensions were extreme.
On the one hand, very few jobs would demand that kind of intellectual commitment and total focus and impeccable behavior like being a professor.
First of all, because as a professor you're surrounded by human beings, you're surrounded by young human beings and you you have a super positional power among them.
 In fact, Dennis Woods' heterosexual colleagues were doing it, were taking advantage of that.
 But that comes at a cost, and then you have these losses of control.
 I heard other stories about this, like, you know, completely losing control and exploding for basically no reason.
 So that I think was a little bit the dichotomy that emerges from...
 And so I think in the end, this behavior or the behavior you saw with Bob was another manifestation of this.
 On the one hand, I think there was really what could be called love in their own way.
I think they really cared about each other.
 You see this with so many cases of heterosexual pairs who destroy each other's life on the moment and can't detect themselves.
 Yes.
And, you know, I told you the episode when the detective went to the one that reopened the cold case this was in 2006 so Bob was still alive and doing great so the detective remembers yeah I remember this very vivid memory of the time I went to interview he was there yeah so no no no the this is the Latino detective Gutierrez that was in the cold case unit that in early 2000 reopened all the unsolved homicide cases in Los Angeles.
 I see.
 And just because of alphabetical order, he was given the app.
 I see.
for us, you look at the material and you put it into since they were started using computers and databases, if there was any kind of evidence that would match, and this was fingerprints.
 They created this huge fingerprints database and a bunch of names came up.
These were fingerprints taken by, notice that they took the fingerprints from Montague's bedroom, but nobody took the fingerprints from the car.
 Can you believe it? Even after they found the car? The car was found near the Greyhound bus station.
 Yeah, one of these cases where you sort of jump out and run against the wall.
 Yeah, exactly.
 And so nobody took the thing away.
Anyway, and so the...
he was telling me that he went to...
since one of the fingerprints was Bob's and he said, I went, you know, I contacted him, we set an appointment, I went to see him at his place and he said, I have this very good memory of this very gentle, elderly but in perfect shape black man who welcomed me very nicely we talked about but he became progressively more emotional and at a certain point he started crying and he started crying and he said Lucy you see this ring this is the one that Richard gave me and it was crying like you know it was a strange situation because it was both tender but also almost childlike which probably tells a little bit more about those emotions really childlike that the child desperately wants to be taken care of be loved you know and but of course if those emotions don't involve that you're not able to establish a good relationship an adult you're not an adult and the other person is not an adult but nevertheless I think that it was something very strong and deep that was keeping them together, that kept them until the very end.
 And many years later, there was no reason for Bob.
At that point, Montague couldn't pay for anything.
 But, you know, and if anything, he did stay in touch with Montague's mother after Montague died.
 And Montague's mother left not a huge sum, he left a certain amount of money I found the wheel to him to Bob to my dear my dear son's friend was his name Marcus Robert Marcus yeah it's in the well it was she left money to various people and it was the sum that she would leave to the people that were closer to her.
 I think it was like $2,000 in 1973.
 So...
 So I think there was like in their own way there was some attempt to build a relationship coming from people that had, for different reasons, both emotional traumas and difficulties when they were growing up.
I mean, Richard came from a loving family, but it was an unusual family to begin with.
And as a family that wants to go up the social scale, the more you go up the social scale, the more your identity as a gay man is problematic.
 the social scale the more you go up the social scale the more your identity as a gay man is problematic because you know the higher you are the deeper you can fold up um in the case of bob you know adopted child abandoned it was a complicated story i mean again we don't know much from what i've been able to reconstruct it looks like it was a young black woman in a choir that was basically, became pregnant with a married man who was significantly older.
 All black? Black, yeah.
 And so she couldn't keep the kid and she gave the kid for adoption.
 The kid was given for adoption in another state, well, it was a southern state, so in another state, I thought it was Oklahoma.
 Yeah, something like that, that's what I mean.
 To a couple in which the woman, let's see if I remember, the woman was black, and the guy was white and was a doctor, older than her.
 What happened is that the biological mother moved close and the two women when the white doctor dies they raise the kid together and they move to Los Angeles by the time they move to Los Angeles a few years one of them died and believed the biological though I don't know if it's a biological mother the other mother and so he's gonna be actually the biological mother the other mother and so he's going to be actually the biological mother dies and he remains alone with this older woman that he calls an aunt and he's going to take care of the house and the end until she dies and i found people that you know were teenagers like him you know because they moved when he was a kid to los angeles remember from the neighborhood like oh yeah i mean he was impeccable he was able to clean the house way better than we girls were able to.
 That's, you know, in the neighborhood, we would call each other when we had to clean houses.
 It was a teamwork.
We would always want Bob because Bob would be perfect in doing this.
 It was so, and he was one of the first ones of us to go to UCLA, to be admitted to study at UCLA.
 So he became an example.
The reason why I went to UCLA is because I saw that Bob went to UCLA.
And then she became actually a senator in the California Assembly.
 So it was a little bit complicated to get ahold of her, and then I said, you know, Bob, and then opened up the door and she accepted to receive it.
So how does that jive with an anecdote that Richard told me about Bob, namely that he, I didn't know that there was any Indian, but that's already not the same.
 But that his mother had one of these claims because of land in, I think it was Oklahoma, indeed, that it would be given to black people because it was worthless.
 Oh, yeah.
 You know that story.
 Yeah, well… Is that true? Well, I don't know about the story about Bob, so please continue what Montague talked about.
 Okay, so that family that involved Bob as an adopted child was quite well off because she did the one thing that was right.
 So all these rights that the Indians actually had on land in various places, especially in Oklahoma, that would have been given to them in exchange for stuff that people wanted to have farther east.
So that was one of the places where oil was being found and all these rights were being denied those people because that was a mistake on our part but we can still sort that out.
sort of let out and that she actually is the one thing that had any hope of success.
 And did have success in the end as he went on her own to, I think, Boston to make a deal with one of the most effective lawyers in the country.
 And he took a case in one of these sort of if we win I get nothing and if we lose then I get nothing.
 And she won the very substantial case through the help of this lawyer.
 I mean that makes, I didn't know anything about this story and I can go and double check if, because I have some census documents, if the racial background is specified.
 Because you know, sometimes like colored would be a label for everything that is not white.
 So that's tricky.
 Like South Africa.
 Yeah, yeah.
 The Oklahoma, I'm very much familiar with the Oklahoma situation.
Also in case you are interested, there is a, what I think is one of the, if not the, Martin Scorsese's masterpiece.
It's the movie that just came out.
It's called The Killers.
 Yeah, it's very good, yeah.
It's amazing.
Ah.
It's a very good movie.
It's exactly about that.
Ah.
The Oklahoma, the push of the, the tribe was called Osage.
 The Osage were pushed from the south where they were to Oklahoma because it was the worst land possible.
 And then the oil was discovered.
 So it's really the story.
 And it's not just the story, but the way the story is told and the visual.
 I don't want to say much more, but if you have a chance, go and see it.
 I saw it right before leaving.
 I'm looking forward to be back and seeing it again.
 It's three hours and 26 minutes.
 I just read about it a couple of days ago.
 It's amazing.
 It was very, very great.
 Normally I'm very critical about especially the last things by Scorsese.
 Here it was in a state of grace and really came out with something like, wow, this is what it means to master cinema and master stories and being able to see multiple layers and how to visualize them amazing so but I didn't know that there was this background so it's possible that the adoptive mother was actually a native because it's under in the census it's I think labeled colored and from there I thought colored means black but it could be my mistake I did I do know that the biological mother was black for sure, also because Bob's features are the features of a black person.
 And then the reason why I know that the parents were both black and I know the story of the choir is because I was able to get in touch with the curators of Bob's will.
 They were also his best friends until he died.
 And this was a kid that Bob was a tutor for much earlier.
 I see.
 He was coming from a fancy Jewish family, and they had taken Bob as a house organizer initially but then the mother discovered that Bob had a degree was able to teach a variety of topics and the kid was having problem focusing and so on and they started and the kid loved Bob and so for several years he was the tutor and then later on he started became a lawyer he stayed in touch with Bob, Bob became some sort of like uncle and so on.
 So when he was alone, when he was getting older, you know, they helped him fix things and establish his will and so on.
 And then once he died, since he had nobody left, they took care of the things.
 So I met with him and his wife and they told me some of the stories.
 And he was the one that said look what bob told me is this that you know his biological mother was became pregnant with an older black guy who was married and there was no way and so she couldn't keep him officially so she gave for adoption but then she followed him and the adopted family was kind of open to this especially when the guy the one guy died yeah and so the two women together created a family group and moved away and that's when Bob Young still relatively young before being a teenager went to Los Angeles so as a teenager grew up in the Los Angeles neighborhood of black people and with and that's the other thing because the woman at the senator that I told you she identified the end as blank but you know that's the issue of you know Bob may have presented her as black and you know depending on the features but remember yeah you know But remember, he was taking care of his black ant, and he was very caring, he was very well organized in the house.
 So that's where I got most of the story about Bob, because there is really very little left.
 Yeah, I guess so.
 Except that I know that he graduated from UCLA, and that maybe, and again I don't have facts to prove that, he wanted to start a career as a schoolteacher.
 That I want to know too.
 What actually was his major? History.
 History.
 History.
 So I think he would teach history, maybe geography, I don't know what that is.
 And again, this is a story that only one person told me, so I cannot even cross.
 But the story was told in a way that as soon as he graduated from LA he started and after a couple of years there were several complaints coming from parents about him being a problem for the children.
My understanding is that Bob did not have a very masculine appearance and I guess it was not too hard by interacting with him to at least become suspicious that he could be an homosexual.
 And now you can imagine.
 As soon as those days as a parent and so he was fired and his career was over.

SPEAKER_01: 0:31:20-0:31:21
 I see.

SPEAKER_00: 0:31:21-0:32:46
 And like there was probably around the time he met Richard because Bob graduated in 1953 from UCLA.
 Let's see if it works because he was born in 1928 and he must have graduated when he was 21, no 23.
 It took a little bit longer to graduate.
 And so 23, he was born in 1928, so, well, 51.
So, 51.
Montague arrived in 55.
So, probably maybe he was already without a regular job by the time he met.
They met right away, I think, just a couple of months after.
At UCLA, on the UCLA campus campus, the Kirchhoff Coffee House.
 Do you remember the Kirchhoff building, which is the one where you go up the stairs, on the right, the slightly gothic building, there is a coffee, which I think is the oldest coffee place on campus.
 That's so right.
 And there was a gathering, especially for this alternative community.
 I think there was also one of the few transvestite people at that time, and definitely some black guys.
 They were comfortable enough in that area of campus, and a friend introduced them to that group.
 Hans, thank you very much.
 Sorry, I must have exhausted you, but every time I come here,

