IC: 0:00:00-0:02:06
And I can transcribe them. And I'm not missing any detail. I learned that it's always difficult to write down everything. And so I want to be able to follow the conversation without the notes. So I'll let you know what you can tell me if you can.. 
And I went back to the things that you wrote me, just to have an idea. And of course, you're welcome to expand on everything. But definitely, from what you wrote me, there seems to be two major areas of your interaction with Richard, one more direct and the other one less direct. The less direct one is the one through Paul and what you heard from Paul. But another one, which was a very nice surprise for me, was to know that you were there at Berkeley at the same time Richard was at Berkeley. (Yes.)
And so I really would like to ask you, you know, whatever you remember of that time, not just about Richard and, you know, Richard and people around Richard, but also you have a very special view and can provide a very special perspective about the place. That's the place, mathematics and philosophy, were his two places. So having an idea of what the department looked like, what the people looked like, what the atmosphere looked like, I mean, it would be very invaluable because definitely there's no doubt that Berkeley changed his life. The man, the young man that came from Stockton, was intellectually gifted, but you can totally see that he gets to Berkeley and something happens. He discovers his gifts, he discovers many, many things. And by the time six years later he moves to Los Angeles, he's a very different man. And even people that knew him from Stockton and then ran into him later say, "Wow! He was different."
So anything about that environment, that special place, anything that you can remember, every thought that you may have based on your own experience, I think could be of help to... Because I would like to give an idea to people that don't know anything, an idea of what Berkeley was in those years, and why for people coming from all over California and all over the US, Berkeley could really touch you and make a difference in your life? 

AD: 0:02:06-0:02:17
Well I think so. Berkeley, I was aware even as an entering freshman that it was a very sophisticated and urbane place, not like the farm. 

IC: 0:02:17-0:02:24
Actually, can I ask you where you were coming from? I always ask people, so they give me an idea of when you go to Berkeley, where they were coming from. 

AD: 0:02:24-0:02:39
The Bay Area. I've lived here all my life, very provincial. My father had graduated from Berkeley. 

IC:
Okay, so it's a family tradition. 

AD:
He met my mother there, she was a student there. My uncle there, my family were sort of a UC family. 

IC: 0:02:39-0:02:40
Okay, already. 

AD: 0:02:40-0:04:27
Yeah. But I was not from the sticks. But I'm going off on a tangent now. I'm harking back to a sociologist's remarks on young men who grew up in farms in the Middle West—Minnesota, Minnesota, Wisconsin—and they would go to a big university. And it was like going to heaven. There was the whole world waiting for them. And I wonder if Richard had a similar experience coming to Berkeley, meeting scholars from all over the world. And from what Paul said, going to St. Mary's was good for him in a couple of ways. Paul said that his parents had taken him out of the public elementary school because he was bullied. He would be pushed off the bus seat and people would throw his books around. And that didn't happen at St. Mary's. And Paul and Richard had some joint projects. I think Richard already had a printing press going, and Paul was very interested in that. He liked mechanical things. And Paul told me, I think, that he and Richard started the choir. You had a picture of that with Richard conducting and Paul singing. So I think they were both of a nature to expand and explore what they had. Paul told some stories growing up on the farm, how he would try to use his mother's sewing machine to stitch up a sail for his raft that he would sail on the canal. 

IC: 0:04:27-0:04:29
So actually, where was Paul from in terms of? 

AD: 0:04:29-0:05:24
Paul grew up on a dairy farm in the delta, the California delta, near Stockton. His mother wasn't having him and his siblings go to that one-room schoolhouse. She drove them into Catholic schools in Stockton every day. First St. Agnes Elementary and then St. Mary's High School. And her service, by the way, was at St. Mary's church. So even on the farm I think Paul was inclined to explore. And when he got to high school, I think he would take advantage of what he found there. He remembers one teacher with a special esteem, Sister David, who was his mother's classmate. 

IC: 0:05:24-0:05:25
Really? 

AD: 0:05:25-0:05:28
Really. 

IC: 0:05:28-0:05:31
She was the principal at the time, Richard and Paul were there, at least for two years. 

AD: 0:05:31-0:06:17
Is that right? Sister David? (Yeah, yeah.)
Apparently, people thought very highly of her. And a small school, it was hard to get all the classes you wanted. And so Sister David would meet once a week with about five pupils and assign a great big thick book to read in one week. And then they would discuss. So, yes, he remembers Sister David very fondly and with respect, and I don't recall him talking that way about anybody else. 

IC: 0:06:17-0:07:13
She must have had like—as an example of the kind of intellectual profile that she had, Richard, when he graduated from St. Mary's, he went to the junior college for one year. So he was a 16 turning 17, maybe the parents thought he would be too young to go to Berkeley, so for one year he went to Stockton Junior College. And so I found some of his lecture notes and one of these was on like one of those general classes on English, history of English and English literature. And on one page of lecture notes there was an invited speaker and the invited speaker was Sister David and comparing the notes her lecture was definitely the most ambitious one in the class. She was basically reconstructing the history of the novel through English literature. 

AD: 0:07:13-0:07:14
Wow!


IC: 0:07:14-0:07:42
From the very beginning, from Chaucer basically, all the way to the early 20th century. I was impressed by it, like, you know, and you could totally see the difference with respect to the standard lectures. They were more narrow, more elementary. But hers was really broad. And Richard took lots of notes. So she must have been really something special intellectually. 

AD: 0:07:42-0:07:58
I wonder about her own training. I think she was, I don't recall the order of nuns. (Dominicans.)
Dominicans. (Dominicans, yeah.)
So she perhaps went to Dominican College in Marin, as did my sister-in-law. 

IC: 0:07:58-0:09:32
And they told me they shared a PhD. They didn't remember what PhD they had, because I was able to find some of their classmates, and there was a little gathering in Stockton last time I was there, and two of them remember, "Yeah, I know that she had a PhD, I don't remember in what, but she had a PhD."
And all of them remember her as both intellectually gifted, some of them used the word intimidating a little bit, you know, she wouldn't have to say anything. She would look at you. And you know if you were right or wrong, if you had done something good or something bad. But I think you're totally right about this idea of, Richard's parents tried to find a place that would be more protective for him. Definitely what appears from what I heard about St. Mary's in comparison I also talked to people that went to the large public high school, Stockton High and there was a very different universe. It was like 1,500 students so like almost ten times St. Mary's. And there were like clubs, groups, and hierarchies, and there was much less control. My understanding is that the nuns were, I have not heard about any kind of physical violence, but they were definitely keeping very strict control. Students were supposed to behave in a certain way even when they were walking in the hall, so probably it would have been much harder for anybody to do something that they were not allowed to do. And for somebody like Richard, probably, that was very important. 

AD: 0:09:32-0:09:41
Yeah, I think that was probably a smart move on his parents' part to put him away out of his own town. Was it Delta College? 

IC: 0:09:41-0:10:56
So he went to St. Mary's for the entire time of high school, and then he went to basically... So what now is called Delta College at that time was called Junior High. Sorry, (Junior College) Junior College. Stockton Junior College. It was a two-year college. Right next to it, basically, it was shared with the very same campus with a private, these days called University of the Pacific, at that time it was called College of the Pacific, which was a private institution. (Yes.)
So what some people would do, they would go for the first two years to Stockton College and then they would transfer for the last two years to the College of the Pacific. (Yes.)
But there were also other students that would do maybe their first year there at the Stockton College, and then they would go to Berkeley. (Yes.)
I met at least another person that did that. (Yeah.)
Some of them would come back. They didn't like Berkeley. It was too much for them. They wanted to be in Stockton. In the case of Richard, I think there is no sign that he ever went back to Stockton. I mean, once he left Stockton, I think his parents moved with him right away, so they all moved to Oakland. And from that moment on, I think really his life was Berkeley. 

AD: 0:10:56-0:11:03
Yeah. Yeah, I imagine Berkeley offered him a great deal. 

IC: 0:11:03-0:11:23
So would you remember Berkeley those years? In comparison to where you grew up, you said you were in the Bay Area, which was already a more lively community than Stockton to begin with. Still, if you compare where you grew up with Berkeley, what did you find in Berkeley that was not in your home? Actually, can I ask where in the Bay Area you grew up? 

AD:
 In Lafayette.  It's a suburb. 

Which part of the Bay Area? It's east. It's east of Oakland. And first you would come to the town of Orinda, then... 

IC: 0:11:35-0:11:37
Yes, yes, yes, I've been to that area. 

AD: 0:11:37-0:11:37
Yeah. 

IC: 0:11:37-0:11:51
Well, definitely not as urban as Berkeley. But I'm curious to know what it was that, when you went to Berkeley, what was your reaction? Would you be like, "Oh yeah, this is what I was expecting", versus like, "Oh, what a place!"


AD: 0:11:51-0:14:12
Well, it was not very unexpected, because we were frequently in Berkeley and Oakland. We lived out in the burbs in Lafayette, but for shopping and the dentist, we went into Oakland. (I see, I see.)
And my grandmother had been, they were called the University Dames. These were mothers of Berkeley students, namely my father. And she liked to escort her grandchildren around to different places, including the campus. And she would pack up a little lunch and we'd wander around Strawberry Glade and Faculty Glade, Strawberry Canyon. And she would explain to me what the Latin engraving on the monuments and bridges and stuff meant and how there was a mistake in this Latin. Oh dear! Because it said "hanc pontem" should have said "honc pontem" or maybe I've got it the other way around. 

IC:
Oh I see, because it was the masculine accusative, I see. 

AD:
Such an embarrassment for the university. I think they had re-engraved at some point. Yeah, so my grandmother escorted me around and I knew, whatchamacallit, auditorium. Come on, Anne. It'll come to me in a moment. And I had actually been in that building, Wheeler, Wheeler Auditorium, which was in Wheeler Hall. And I think she actually escorted me in there at some point because I remembered a certain room, 11 Wheeler, it was a small auditorium. And later I took a class there and I remembered 11 Wheeler. So Berkeley was not unknown. What did I expect? I don't think there were any big surprises. I don't recall any. At that time, 1950, things were very formal. I started working for the math department in 1952. I was a junior. I don't know if I told you this story or not. 

IC: 0:14:12-0:14:20
You told me that at a certain point you worked in the office and that's where you saw some of the characters of the physics department. 

AD: 0:14:20-0:14:21
Yes, it was a good vantage point. 

IC: 0:14:21-0:14:28
So can you tell me, were you working, was it like the main office? I had no idea how the department was organized. 

AD: 0:14:28-0:15:25
First of all, a precursor, I was grading papers for one semester. And that was a good review of the calculus course. But then this opening in the office came up. I read about it on the bulletin board, and it paid better. And it was more fun, because there I was, people coming in and out, phones ringing. And it was more fun than just sitting in a room marking papers, although the other was probably better preparation for being a mathematician. So yeah, my job title was clerk stenographer. And of course, I did become acquainted with the faculty and certainly with the graduate students, to a less extent the undergraduates. But there were not that many undergraduates. It was not a popular major. 

IC: 0:15:25-0:15:27
Because it was a difficult one? 

AD: 0:15:27-0:16:22
Perhaps. At the same time, I was acquainted with the statistics laboratory, it was called then, it was not yet a separate department, because I was majoring in it. And I did graduate with a bachelor's degree in, it was called mathematical statistics, but I realized it was a mistake's degree in—it's called mathematical statistics, but I realized it was a mistake. I didn't like it. I didn't understand it. So after looking around for a job when I graduated, there was a little recession and I could not get a security clearance. You don't have to publish that, but it was because of my brother's political activities. So I knew there was a job waiting for me back in the math department. And I just continued my job in math for another two years. So I was employed by the department for two years, my junior and senior years, and then two more years. 

IC: 0:16:22-0:16:31
So when you say two more years, can you give me like your junior and senior, that would be from 1952 to 1954, is that correct? 

AD: 0:16:31-0:16:32
That's correct. 

IC: 0:16:32-0:16:34
And then was there a break or you immediately retired? 

AD: 0:16:34-0:17:09
Only during a summer while I thought I had a job in Livermore. And then, yeah, back in the fall of 1954 until August of 1956. So yes, during that four years I became better acquainted, but still things are very formal. I was Miss Alpen for a long, long time. I wouldn't dream of addressing even a graduate student by his or her first name, not until I had known him for several years. Well, I think that's all different now. 

IC: 0:17:09-0:17:13
And they would always call you Ms. Halpin? 

AD:
 Yeah. 

IC:
Everybody. The professors... 


AD: 0:17:13-0:17:17
Well, no, they would call me Ann. They would call me Ann. 

IC: 0:17:17-0:17:19
What about the graduate students? 

AD: 0:17:19-0:17:42
Oh, they would probably call me Ann if they knew my name. So yes, it was very formal. But Berkeley has this sort of faux democracy. It doesn't use titles like "doctor" and "professor" very much. It was "Mr. This" and "Mr. That."


IC: 0:17:42-0:17:44
So "Mr. Tarski"? 

AD: 0:17:44-0:17:45
Yeah. 

IC:
Oh, okay. That's interesting. 

AD:
I didn't know that. I always thought they would call him Professor Tarski. 

AD: 0:17:49-0:17:56
Mr. Tarski, that's what I called him. Sarah, the department administrative assistant, called him Alfred. 

IC: 0:17:56-0:18:00
Oh, wow. 

AD: 0:18:00-0:18:03
She was on a first-name basis with faculty. I was not. 

IC: 0:18:03-0:18:07
The hierarchy. (Yeah.)


AD: 0:18:07-0:18:12
Yeah, Berkeley was like that and probably a lot of other places. 

IC: 0:18:12-0:18:13
And do you remember the dress code? 

AD: 0:18:18-0:18:35
I remember what women wore. In the winter, we wore sweaters and and skirts, and a certain day in the spring we would all break out in colored cotton dresses. And men wore jeans mostly, or slacks, shirts, sweaters. 

IC: 0:18:35-0:18:41
Did they have to wear a jacket or they just wore a shirt? 

AD: 0:18:41-0:19:13
No, they didn't have to. I think even TAs usually wore a jacket teaching. Mr. what's his name? I'll think of it in a minute. He kept a jacket on a hanger in his closet. But was it a jacket, or was it more like a medical smock? It was something he slipped into when he went into the classroom to teach. 

IC: 0:19:13-0:19:15
I see. The uniform. 

AD: 0:19:15-0:19:33
I guess it was a jacket. What did women wear? I think undergraduates, women wore sometimes bobby socks and socks, maybe flats. 

IC: 0:19:34-0:19:37
Would women wear pants in those days? 

AD: 0:19:38-0:20:50
No. It was a great day for little girls when they could wear pants to school. (I can imagine.)
My knees were always skinned when I was a small child. And I know some young women who I don't think own a dress. So, things have changed a lot in the dress department. There were some department functions, there were parties, and I was considered too young for some things. I recall when a visiting faculty wife was reading something humorous. It was a mock wedding invitation couched in mathematical language like they're fundamental domains. And so she was reading this to me, translating as she went, and I noticed she skipped over some parts. 
On another occasion, Sarah was driving me and Mrs. Tarski to a party. At that time, during that was the period when she had left Alfred. And Mrs. Tarski tossed off some bit of gossip. Sarah was chagrined. She didn't want me to have heard that. And she said something kind of sarcastic about, "Well, I don't suppose she mentioned the Kelly separation, did she?"
And then she was really chagrined. She'd realized she'd let slip another tidbit of gossip that I should not have known about. 

IC: 0:21:33-0:22:16
Actually, since I didn't know that you actually met Mrs. Tarski, would you remember her? I mean, what I know is what comes out of the book by Anita and Sol Feferman. And it's definitely, I think, one of the most fascinating characters of that book. This woman that has gone through very difficult experiences. I can only imagine those years in Poland with the two kids and the risk that they would be. 

AD: 0:22:16-0:22:18
It's a remarkable story, isn't it? 

IC: 0:22:18-0:23:31
Yeah, I mean, wow. And then completely changing her life by coming here in a completely different world. And, you know, I don't know if you remember that episode, which stayed in my mind. That's the episode when she, Alfred, a graduate student at that time, C.C. Chang, and a young professor, I can't remember his name, were driving in the car. The young professor was driving, he was a very bad driver, and at a certain point, I think he lost control of the car, and there's an accident. The young girl still didn't know what to do, and she is the one that went next to him, tried to see if they could stop the blood, and have words of comfort for him, which really shows, you know, a strength and a capacity to react to whatever tragedy you're coming from that was, you know, really touched him. I wonder what you remember of her? Is there a way of talking, for example, I assume that she had an accent when she was speaking. 

AD: 0:23:31-0:23:42
Yes, I was fascinated with her accent. And I also liked Alfred's accent, the way he would come into the office and say, "Sarah, do you have an envelope?" The "L". 

IC: 0:23:42-0:23:48
Well, you're good. Yeah, it sounds like it actually. 

AD: 0:23:48-0:24:02
I saw very little of Mrs. Tarski, but I remember recalling how she said, "brrroadcast, brrroadcast". But the incident you speak of, Jan... 

IC: 0:24:02-0:24:06
LASTSTOP
Yes, Jan, what's his name? Yes, yes. 

AD: 0:24:06-0:24:17
He was my instructor in a statistics class. Yes. (You knew him?)
He was young. His name was Jan, it wasn't Tarski, but it was something like that. He was Polish, wasn't he? 

IC: 0:24:17-0:24:55
Yes, yes, yes. And with some "Eskis". Jan, Jan, Jan. I have it on my computer. 

AD:
Kalicki? 

IC:
Kalicki, Kalicki, yes, Kalicki, excellent. And I know that Tarski was really the one that, you know, he did every possible thing to have him at Berkeley. And I think Kalicky first moved to the US, I think he may have even been for one year at another, like somewhere in the San Jose area with a temporary job. In the meantime, Tarski was maneuvering to get him a position. And I believe that in the end, he got a joint appointment mathematics-philosophy, I think. 

AD: 0:24:55-0:24:56
Oh. Yeah. 

IC: 0:24:56-0:25:00
That's what he ended up doing. So you had him. 

AD: 0:25:00-0:25:11
Yes. I think it was an algebra class. I know he was in, I think he was associated with statistics, but I think it was an algebra class. 

IC: 0:25:11-0:26:25
What do you remember of Tarski? So what kind of person, because what I know is from the book, but of course the book is something different. And I talked to Anita and Sol, we became good friends and so we had a more informal conversation about it. But they were biased from their own perspective, which was a very special perspective. So it was the perspective of Sol Feferman, one of Tarski's students. They went through, you know, the 'Tarski experience'. As you know, it was a kind of a tough experience. Some of them enjoyed more, some others enjoyed less, and so it's always been kind of like, you know, a conflictual relationship with Tarski. And Anita was looking at Tarski from their perspective and also the perspective of a woman who doesn't like those kind of men. And so, you know, she was both fascinated by Tarski, but also like, "Uhhh, too much."
So I'm curious from your perspective, which was a different one in the sense that you were not, as you mentioned, you studied as an undergraduate. You were working in the office in the mathematics department. What do you remember of him, or what do you remember about people interacting with him? 

AD: 0:26:25-0:26:29
Well, he was a power. That was clear. 

IC: 0:26:29-0:26:34
So you, too, despite being just a young undergraduate, could perceive that. 

AD: 0:26:34-0:27:47
Yes. Yes, it was very clear. And I think Anita's book describes the way he would come into a room. And he always wore a suit and a tie, and his neck was sort of bulging out over the top of the collar. With a cigarette, usually. And sometimes moving backwards, sometimes moving forward. And yes, you mentioned C.C. Chang a minute ago. And I remember he would be doing things for Tarski like binding up a bunch of papers into a volume or something. And so yes, he got a lot of deference, and I gathered that he had a lot of clout at department meetings, although I did not attend those department meetings. You were just talking about how he got his man Kalicki in. And I gathered he did have that sort of influence with policy and hiring and firing. A lot of this was not even gossip. It was just a sense of the way people moved and deferred and that kind of thing. 

IC: 0:27:47-0:28:31
Some people can get what they want with a behavior that, at least on the surface, is kind of polite. You feel that, "Okay, I'm asking this politely, but this is really an order."
While other people manifest already in their way, they ask, you see that it's an order, they tend to be more, let's say, less smooth and more aggressive. What kind of personality was Tarski? Was more like, "Well, I'm a gentleman on the surface, but you know that I have the power, so you better do what I want", versus "I'm just ordering you and you do it."


AD: 0:28:31-0:29:40
No, he was very European culture, smooth, I would say. I recall a trick of his. He would dictate a letter. And when you learn shorthand you learn how to write a dollar amount, $5.20. You would write five and a slash meaning D. So when you learn stenography you learn how to handle currency, but Tarski wasn't aware of this. So he would say, "I have ordered dollars five to be placed in the bank", something like that, correcting for the apparent fault in the English language. (Laughter,)
What else did Tarski do besides ask for an envelope? I think he would usually address his wishes to Sarah rather than directly to me. 

IC:
And then she would convey. 

AD:
She would deploy the work. 

IC: 0:29:40-0:29:52
Did you have a sense that it was easy for Sarah to interact with him, or it was like in general for people to interact with him, or was it kind of intimidating? 

AD: 0:29:52-0:30:15
Well I think that Sarah knew she was at the top of her hierarchy and Tarski knew he was at the top of his hierarchy. So in a sense they were dealing with each other as equals at the summit. At that time, Sarah had her own office adjacent to the main office, which had I think three desks with three clerks sitting in them. 

IC: 0:30:15-0:30:39
So I'm trying to get a sense of how common it was for a woman to have that position of responsibility. So would the job that Sarah had be like the job for a woman at that time? 

AD: 0:30:39-0:32:33
Definitely. Very commonly, I would say. In a meeting, I can't remember what this meeting was or why, but it was given by some top administrator in the university. And he said, "Well let the chairman of the department be gone for a month, nobody would notice. But if the department secretary is gone for a day, it's chaos."
I had a position of being both a student and a member of the administration, no matter how minor. Something else that was very characteristic of the university then and maybe still is that undergraduates were pretty low on the totem pole. They just got short shrift from the administration. There was no feeling, there was no sense of helpfulness from the administration, no friendliness certainly. I ran a little test once. I was going on an errand. I picked up a university envelope in the math department. I was going to convey it to the administration building. So I walked into the proper window in the administration building, holding my envelope down here and just stood there. The clerk continued to file her fingernails. Then I held up the university envelope, got instant attention. That seemed so telling to me. 
I had a fantasy where I would address the entire university and tell the administration that they should understand they were in last place, students in first place, faculty close second. That was my fantasy. I wonder if things are any different!


IC: 0:32:36-0:36:11
You're raising a good point. My perspective is, clearly it's not a perspective for the entire university, what I deal with, I was an undergrad advisor for a few years, so I'm talking about the interaction within the department, and in our case it's the Department of Linguistics, we definitely want undergraduates, we want to increase their enrollment, so I think we try to be as friendly as possible. 
Outside my department, now I am the Associate Director of the Study Abroad Program, and we definitely want to increase the number of our students, of undergraduates who study abroad and try that experience. So in this sense, I think I've been working with two bodies within the university that are really eager to create a friendly interaction with undergraduates. But I've heard stories, for example, at the financial office, where undergraduates go to understand, you know, what's their financial situation, where you have long lines. I don't know how friendly they are, I never tried that. I think there is in general, I don't know if the two things are related, and I wonder what you think about it. One big change that happened, and I saw that these are numbers, is the cost. University of California used to be basically accessible to anybody. I was able to find the fees that you guys were paying in those years and, doing all the adjustments and calculations, but just to give you an example, when Montague joined Berkeley, so it's 1948, he was paying, if I remember correctly, I think it was something like $15 each semester of fees. Four years later as a teaching assistant, he would be earning $130 a month. 
Now, that gives you a sense. Like, with the stipend of one month as a TA, you could fully cover the fees for the entire year. I mean, TAs in our department earn $2,000 a month now, and if you are a California resident at the University of California, these days you have to pay, I think, $15,000, $16,000 a year just for fees. So they give you a sense of like, this has become a big burden, and if you are out of state, the situation is even worse. 
And so I wonder if this has also changed. Like, "Well, I pay all this money. I'm expecting a certain kind of service", versus the attitude at that time, where I think the University of California was really perceived as a continuation of the services that the state of California was providing. And my understanding was that it was relatively easy to access. Not everybody could go to the University of California, but if you were motivated and interested, there was not this extreme competition that we have these days. You start preparing your kids for Berkeley when they are in elementary school, going to the right school, taking the extra classes, the extra activities, showing that they've done everything before going to college, like, you know, captain here, secretary here, leader of this group, and so on. And the number of people that come from abroad, from out of state has increased, and they pay almost $40,000 a year. And they expect. So my impression is that there could have been some change mainly due to that. 

AD: 0:36:11-0:36:46
Plenty of change, yes. The United States is going down a wrong path, in my view. But the story I like to tell is that the four years I worked in the math department, I could be completely self-supporting on working less than half time. And our daughter attended Stanford University. What a difference in the way undergraduates were treated!
I was surprised and pleased. So much hand-holding. Well, that's what we're paying for. 

IC: 0:36:46-0:37:01
Actually, Anne, can I ask you, did Paul tell you about his experience at Stanford? 

AD:
Yes. 

IC:
It would be interesting to compare the experience that you guys had, which indirectly is also a way to compare Richard's experience at Berkeley and Paul's experience at Stanford. How was Stanford in those days? 

AD: 0:37:01-0:38:50
Well, it was already a school for upper middle class, if not rich kids. Paul attended Stanford partly because his grandfather had attended Stanford around 1900. Paul didn't get a full scholarship, or any scholarship. He had to earn his own way. One of the jobs he had was at Beal's Greenhouse in Palo Alto. It was a night job. And he would run around doing things, adjusting temperatures and valves. And then he would be able to just sit down and study. However, he didn't sleep at night that way, so he recalls falling asleep the next morning in the calculus class and some of his classmates recall that too. So yes, it was a lot different. And well, after his time in school, Stanford made a real effort to upgrade, and it did. And now it's one of the most distinguished in the United States. But at that time it wasn't that distinguished, according to Paul at least. And he described some of the crocks there, especially in the music department, which he tended to hang out in. What else did he say? He generally admired the faculty he had, at least in the sciences. In some of the other departments, he found the faculty more mixed in their competence. 

IC: 0:38:50-0:40:10
These matches, Sol Fefferman told me Sol Fefferman joined Stanford as a faculty in 1955. And I was also lucky enough to interview, just one year before he died, another professor who had joined Stanford even earlier, in 1951, Pat Suppes. And so both Pat and Sol told me that they arrived at Stanford when Stanford was changing. So I guess roughly around the early 50s was the time, or mid-50s, when the plan that had been elaborated after the Second World War to turn Stanford into a high-profile university started being developed, which meant essentially: convey a substantial amount of money in hiring the best people, providing them with the support necessary to turn into a top research university. 
So probably was at the beginning of the change. So in some areas, and I think they started with science, science was definitely their core. So in some areas of science they started hiring better people and provided them with support. In other areas they waited through a process that took at least 20 years to turn Stanford into the Stanford that we have known for the past three decades, being one of the top, if not the top, university. So probably these are people that really, Paul, Sol, and Pat, from different perspectives, they really saw the change. 

AD: 0:40:10-0:42:30
Yes, yeah. He was there just post-war. He started in 1947. His career was interrupted by two years in the army. And then he came back and finished. And some other things were going on at that time. Stanford started SRI, and I recall when I was in high school, somebody came and spoke to the high school students about this new research and development, and they planned to get half of their money from private sources. And so then, later on, I married a man who was working there. And still later, there was a split between the two organizations, and Paul said it was because SRI wanted to be free to pursue certain kinds of funding, that theretofore there had been a kind of a gentleman's agreement that one institution would compete for these and the other institution would compete for those, but SRI wanted to compete for more. I think they also split on the issue of classified research. 
The excuse was a demonstration involving a certain professor of literature, whose name I've forgotten, at Stanford, who was rather revolutionary in his views. He led some students into a classified area or a locked area or something where they shouldn't have been. That was just the excuse Stanford needed to get rid of that guy. He was such an embarrassment and the alumni couldn't stand him as a Red, and they did. They got rid of a tenured professor. Eventually found another position, teaching American Lit, that was his subject, in the east someplace. I may or may not think of his name. That was the excuse for the split between Stanford and SRI. That's according to Paul. 

IC: 0:42:30-0:43:42
So going back to the time when Paul and Richard were both in Stockton, did you have a sense from the way Paul was describing Richard that... I mean, you mentioned the fact that Richard's parents took him out of the public system because he was bullied. Did Paul ever mention to you anything having to do with like, well, like the strangeness of his behavior or anything that like would make Richard different from other classmates. Paul, from also what I heard from other classmates, interacted with Richard definitely more than others. They remember the two of them. They remember the two of them going to concerts together, for example. Yeah. They remember the two of them in the choir as like the driving forces of the choir. Did you have a sense of what Paul found in Richard of interesting or different? Why he was so connected with Richard rather than with others? Do you remember any remark, anything? 

AD: 0:43:42-0:43:54
I don't. I gathered it from what Paul said, that it was a shared interest in things, especially music. But then there was this printing press of Richard's. 

IC: 0:43:54-0:43:56
So Richard had this printing press at his own place? 

AD: 0:43:56-0:44:01
I think so. Perhaps he had built it. I'm pretty vague on the printing press. 

IC: 0:44:01-0:44:11
Because other people mentioned the fact that there was a printing press at his place, and they wanted to do a little, like Richard invited them to his place to do something together about that. 

AD: 0:44:11-0:44:17
Maybe a special volume, some poetry or something perhaps. 

IC: 0:44:17-0:44:26
And you mentioned in one of your messages that you had Richard over at your place once. 

AD:
Yes. 

IC:
He played harpsichord. 

AD: 0:44:26-0:44:33
Yes. We did have a small harpsichord. That was Paul's engagement present to me. 

IC: 0:44:33-0:44:36
So you played harpsichord? 

AD: 0:44:36-0:45:03
I had played keyboard. We didn't play it much. And I can't remember what the occasion was, but I do have a mental image of Richard being in the living room of our house. I had not seen him for a long time, and I remember thinking how slender he is, the belt of his pants wraps around. He's very thin. And so I don't remember much else about that visit. 

IC: 0:45:03-0:45:12
Do you have a sense of which year that could have been? So actually, you and Paul were already together at that point. 

AD: 0:45:12-0:45:19
Yeah, we were. We were married and living in that house. I think it was before we had children, so it would have been before 1964. 

IC: 0:45:19-0:45:25
Before 1964. But that was definitely after 1955, is that correct? 

AD: 0:45:25-0:45:30
It was after 1960 when we married. (Okay.)
It would be in that four-year interval, I think. 

IC: 0:45:30-0:51:14
Okay, that's perfect because that really gives us- I mean, that means that Richard was definitely already in Los Angeles at that point. He was already a professor at UCLA. He was hired in January 1955, and actually he became Associate. He had just become Associate. In 1959 he became Associate Professor. (Gosh.)
Yeah. By the time he died, he was only 40, he was already, the Professor was earning more money in the philosophy department. And that was a very important philosophy department with very important figures like the logician and mathematician of Alonzo Church. So Richard was making as much money as Alonzo Church. And he had this very fast career with his promotions one after the other. He had a very high level of publications, he was highly regarded, and when the department made a, I don't know if it was a mistake or something intentional coming from the chair with whom there was lots of tension and he did not get his promotion. In the UC system there are lots of steps. Even when you become full professor there's step one, step two, step three. So you had been a professor, step four you had to go up for step five and the committee that has to evaluate said, "We can't because the file has been prepared in an embarrassing way. Rejected."
And Richard, I can only imagine the reaction he must have had, got in touch with this network of people and within a few months he got five offers. Two months later, UCLA comes back and offers him no step five, step six!
With a private secretary just for him, and this off-scale salary that brings him all the way up to the top of the department. And this was just a few months before he died. So the man knew how to be in the system and I mean he had value so he was able to recognize his value. 
But then yes, so if it's between 1916 and 1964 it's exactly the time when he has become an associate professor. Two to three years later he was going to become full professor. That's the time when he's buying the house on Mulholland Drive, after he had bought a smaller house closer to UCLA. 
And what I don't know is that there are different versions. Some people say that in his house there was a piano, and some people say that in his house there was an harpsichord. That's why I was asking-
It looks like he was able to play harpsichord. I mean, and he definitely was very good at playing the organ from very early on. People remember from St. Mary's, early on he became the official piano and organ player for the school and was hired by the Church of the Annunciation, the Catholic Cathedral, when he graduated from high school in 47. 47-48 he was the official organ player and choir director. So they waited for him to graduate so they could hire him officially. 
And then when he moved to the Bay Area for all six years of time when he was a graduate student, he had a double job. So he had, as an undergraduate, he had a fellowship. He had won the, I think it was called the Pepsi Cola Award. It was a nationwide competition. I found the material at St. Mary's, so it was a nationwide competition, and 50,000 people would participate, and 120 awards would be given, and Richard won one of them. And that paid for the entire fees and cost of college until he graduated. Then he graduated and started his master's in mathematics and philosophy at the same time and he won the fellowship that covered for those three years. (Wow.)
Then he started his PhD in mathematics and at that point he became a teaching assistant in mathematics. That was 53-55. 

AD:
Did he teach undergraduates? 

IC:
I believe that he did not teach. I think he was just doing – I have not been able to find his name under people that teach. I went to look for the records, but I cannot exclude it completely. My understanding is that teaching assistants could either grade papers or have some sort of like sections, recitations, something like that. And I believe that that's what he did. I don't think he taught his own classes, but I cannot be 100% sure. 
Like for example, I know that the year when Dana Scott and Richard Montague took Tarski's set theory class, it was I think a relatively large class, it was a graduate class. That class had a TA, and I know for sure, because Sol Fefferman was the TA for that class. And what he told me is that his goal was to grade the assignments and to have office hours in which students could go and talk. So I don't know if Richard later had something like that for some class with Tarski, that's what I don't know. But for the entire time at Berkeley, as soon as he moved there, he was hired by, every year, a different congregation, because probably every year he would find a job that would pay more. He would keep track of everything. So he'd see an increase in salary from 120 all the way up to like 180 a month. That was the last job. It was more than he was making at Berkeley as a teaching assistant. So 150 as a teaching assistant, 180 as a choir and a master of music. And so, you know, we're talking about a full-time job, so he would like prepare the choir for the regular celebration through the weekend, Saturday and Sunday, but then there would be special concerts, events, and so on. So he was able to be a TA, work a full-time job, and at the same time publishing. He started publishing then. 

AD: 0:51:14-0:51:17
Gosh, I didn't know this. 

IC: 0:51:17-0:51:45
Yes!
Like when I started I said, "How could you do all this and do it well in such a way?"
So among these skills, I mean I'm sure that he played the piano. People remember him playing the piano. Definitely he played the organ. And some people say "Well I think he played the harpsichord and he had a harpsichord at his place."
But some other people said "Well no I think it was a piano."
So I don't know. But it looks like you know for sure that he had a harpsichord and you played the harpsichord. 

AD: 0:51:45-0:51:52
Well, if you can play the piano, then you can. 


IC:
Probably, you can... 

AD:
It's not much of a switch. It's another keyboard instrument. 

IC: 0:51:52-0:53:04
Because I found some lost documents at UCLA. So the summer I spent at the Montague Archive, I became an investigator. I went back to the philosophy department, which I knew a little bit. I talked to the librarian. We went to this old closet with all these old boxes. And there I found a box with the Montague stuff that was left there, abandoned. It was not transferred with the others. And what I found there is what probably was in many other boxes before the librarian cleaned up. She decided that the criteria was just academic stuff, not personal stuff. "What did you do with the personal stuff? Well, you look for the family. Clearly nobody was alive. And what did you do? I destroyed it.:
When she told me that, I was... So in that lost box, I found... Richard was very organized. Everything had to be kept and organized. So the receipts from monthly payment would look like a very expensive harpsichord. In my hypothesis, that was the harpsichord that he bought for his place. And comparing to how much money he was making, it was definitely an expensive one. 

AD: 0:53:06-0:53:16
I thought that Paul told me that when Richard moved to UCLA, he bought an apartment building and had his parents managing it. Is that not... 

IC: 0:53:16-0:56:30
Yeah, so I don't think it happened right away. From what I've been able to reconstruct, Richard moves to UCLA in January 1955. Until the fall, he rents a place. This was in the middle of the year. They needed him. They were able to get a contract for the six months over the summer. And then there are these letters from the mother, who probably was definitely an important figure at many levels, but in particular, she's giving him suggestions like, "Don't waste your money on rent. Dad and I can help you. Look, it's good to buy. It's a good investment."
So by the end of 1955, he bought his first place, which still exists. It's a lovely, cute little two-bedroom cottage on Beverly Glen, which is one of these canyon roads that from Sunset Boulevard goes up the hill, across, and takes you to the San Fernando Valley. And so he bought that house for sure by the end of 1955. And I think he lived there until early in the 60s. 
So probably around 62, 63, that's when he bought the house on Mulholland Drive. Much nicer, fancier, at the end of the cul-de-sac, this beautiful view of the canyon. Unfortunately, that house was bought in 2010 for $4 million, destroyed, to build an $8 million mansion. That's what they do now on Mulholland Drive. So the house doesn't exist anymore, but I got in touch with the police, and they still had the file, of course the case is still open. So they took pictures of the house when they went there. It was a murder, and so they took pictures. So I was able to have an idea of what the house looked like. Now, what I know for sure is that around the very same time, so first half of the 60, probably 63, 64, the parents that had lived in Oakland until then, they moved to Los Angeles. And they buy, probably Richard buys, an apartment complex in the San Fernando Valley, right down the hill where Richard lives. And it's one of those small apartment complexes, you know, on two levels with a balcony that goes around and, you know, five apartments on top, five apartments below. The parents were living in one of them, and they were managing the complex. And I assume that the others were renting. And so maybe it was even earlier. What I know for sure is that by 1964, the parents are in Los Angeles. I know that they didn't move with him. There are letters of the parents coming in summer of 57 to help Richard fix a few things in the house that he bought, which means that they were still living in Oakland at that time. So sometime between the end of the 50s and the early 60s, that's when they buy the apartment complex and they move to Los Angeles. And from that moment on, they will be there with him. And all the way to the night of the murder, when it was his father's birthday. 

AD:
Heaven sakes!


IC:
Yeah, he went to celebrate because the father was already sick enough that he couldn't leave his place. I mean, he was doing fine mentally, but physically he had something, I don't know what it was, he could not leave the place. So Richard went there with his roommate to have dinner with the mother and the father. And that was a Saturday night. And then Sunday morning was when he was found dead. 

AD: 0:56:30-0:56:36
Heaven sakes!
I think Paul said that the dad worked for the telephone company in Stockton. 

IC: 0:56:36-0:58:06
I think he was very right. He had a very good memory, yeah. I found records of that, and that's probably the reason why the family moved to Stockton to begin with before Richard was born. At that time, the mother was from Lompoc and the father was working for the telephone company near Lompoc, probably that's how they met. And for a few years he kept working there. And probably my understanding is that the telephone company, especially when you were doing some career, in order for you to go to the next step, often they would ask you to move to direct this office and to become... So by the time, so in the late 20s they moved to Stockton. And that's where he stayed until he retired, probably when they moved to Berkeley. By 1948 he had to retire. Both parents were significantly older than you. So Richard was an only child. The mother had him when she was 36 and the father was 41. And they had been married since, like they had been married for, I think, 15 years. 

AD:
 Unusual. 

IC:
Yeah. And I had the hypothesis, well, maybe they adopted him. They couldn't have children that adopted him. Actually, I did find a birth certificate. He was born at the hospital. I even know the kind of drug they gave to the mothers for the doctor's sign. At least we know for sure that he was her biological son. Let's say that. 

AD: 0:58:06-0:58:09
Another birther controversy!


IC: 0:58:13-0:58:27
So you said that when you saw Richard at your place, you said, oh, "He looked kind of like slim since last time I saw him."
So you had met him before? 

AD: 0:58:27-0:59:30
Well just that would have been from graduate student days. That would have been from 55, 56 at Berkeley. And I'm not sure why that tidbit remains with me. He was never fat, I don't think, during the time I knew him. And I also have a sense that that visit at our house in Menlo Park was soon after we married. Because this is a sense that we'd only been in the house a short time. The living room seemed unfurnished. And when we moved in, there was almost no furniture. We kept it that way for a long time. When the children were born, they could have their toys, their wheel toys. It was a large living room. So intuition says that visit was closer to 1960 than to 1964. 

IC: 0:59:30-0:59:55
Do you have a sense that Paul and Richard stayed in touch? Like, was that a visit due to the fact that they stayed in touch and then there was the occasion Richard stopped by. Or was some sort of like, sometimes you lose track of somebody. And then for some like combination of circumstances, it's "OK, why don't you come home?" and so on. 

AD: 0:59:55-1:00:08
Right, that's a good question. And I don't know how that visit came about. I'm guessing that Richard was there for a conference or something. But I don't know. I don't know how that happened. 

IC: 1:00:08-1:00:58
Because basically, Paul would be the only, together with somebody else that Richard was in high school with, although he was three years older than Richard. Paul and Bob, that's his name, would be the only two people, from what I understand, from Stockton that he stayed in touch with. Clearly, for him, Berkeley was a, you know, when you flip the page, okay? That's a new chapter of my life. But Paul and Bob he stayed in touch with,. He didn't lose contact. So I was just trying to understand if they had talked to each other, they had seen each other before, or was it some more occasional thing that happened? 

AD: 1:00:58-1:01:02
Yes, and I don't know. I don't know. 

IC: 1:01:05-1:01:34
Do you ever, did you remember, and I apologize, I'm asking you to go back 55 years ago. Do you remember if you felt comfortable with him? There are some people that you start talking with and you can immediately relax. And some people that even if you have known them for a while, they still put you in tension. You know what I mean? Do you have any sense of what kind of person was Richard in this respect? 

AD: 1:01:34-1:02:27
Well, Richard was treated as somebody different by other graduate students. At the same time, I think there was respect for his talent and maybe a little bit of envy of it. And I think there was a sense of feeling, a recognition that his behavior was different. I'm not sure in what way. It's one of those things that would have been kept from me. I had no idea that Richard was gay until much later. And it was this kind of thing that, even in a gossipy mode, other graduate students would not come right out and be explicit about. They would say things like, "Oh well, Richard...", and a little bit of non-verbal communication. 

IC: 1:02:27-1:02:33
Non-verbal communication, I see. So you have a sense that there were people that knew more about him? 

AD: 1:02:33-1:02:35
Oh, yes. Yeah. 

IC: 1:02:35-1:02:48
And these people would be like graduate students? 

AD:
Yeah. 

IC:
Okay. Did Paul ever tell you if he had a sense that Richard was gay? 

AD: 1:02:48-1:02:50
No, no, he never did. 

IC: 1:02:54-1:03:24
Going back to your time at Berkeley, something that I was curious about, at a certain point you mentioned that it was a department with clear hierarchy, and I think, I apologize if I misunderstood you, I think you also mentioned that it was mainly men among faculty and students. Did I understand correctly that many of the students and many of the faculty were men, and the presence of women was kind of reduced? 

AD: 1:03:24-1:03:41
Oh, that's correct. There were a few women as graduate and as undergraduate students in mathematics, more than there were in physics, and there were none in engineering. 

IC: 1:03:43-1:03:51
But you were still part of a small group. Like you mentioned you, Ita, and Vita. 

AD: 1:03:51-1:04:01
Women were a small minority. Vita Greenberg, yes. Let's see, anybody else? There were a few graduate students. Can I think of anybody else? 

IC: 1:04:01-1:05:54
By the way, I tried to follow up your suggestion, and I was able to find some contact information for Eva. Although I tried to write her. So she became a professor at Brown. Now she's an Emerita at Brown. I emailed her at her official Brown email a couple of months ago and never heard back. So a couple of weeks ago, last week, I wrote to the chair of the department explaining why I would like to get in touch with her, and just asking if she's doing OK, and maybe if there's a better way to reach her. Some people don't really check their professional email anymore. Maybe they prefer to receive a letter, and there is an address. So I also did a little bit of search about Vita. And unfortunately, so all the information that I was able to find, I have a subscription to ancestry.com to do this investigation. It helped me many times. But for some reason, Vita disappears. I wonder if she changed her last name. So Vita disappears in 1976. Before that, you can see lots of traces where she was born, the high school she went, where she lived, the time in Berkeley, the marriage with Eric Lehman in 1966, and the divorce in 1976. And that's the end. So then there are no traces anymore, at least under Vita Greenberg. I don't know if maybe sometimes, unfortunately, in the US, with the fact that women can change their last name once they get married, that makes genealogical research very difficult. (Oh, yes.)
So I don't know, maybe she remarried under a different name. And I tried various options. I was not able to find any. So when she divorced, she divorced with her name. We see Vida Greenberg under the list, the California divorce list, which is a public document. Then after 1976, I was not able to find it. 

AD: 1:05:54-1:06:00
Well, that's a long time ago. Gosh. And she was at this Northwestern? 

IC: 1:06:00-1:07:10
I checked, actually. I think the website that you found is the same one that I found. That website is just the host of that project which is called the Genealogy Mathematic Project. So it's basically their server, the server in the North Dakota Mathematics Department, hosts this website where all mathematicians can be added. You can do yourself or other people can do that for you. You add your name and the students that you had and your professor, so you create a genealogy tree of like how you are connected in the world of mathematics. So somebody did that for her, so she appears there because she was Lehman's student and that's how she appears. Sometimes if you have your own students, then the tree continues and they show "this was her professor in this school, they were her students", but under her, it ends in 1964 when she got her PhD. And then 1966, I know independently, she got married with Lehman. And then 1976, she divorced. But I'd done the research. I was not able to find her in any institution. So just to show that I tried, I was intrigued. 

AD: 1:07:10-1:07:15
Yeah, well, that's interesting. I wonder, of course, she may no longer be living. 

IC: 1:07:15-1:07:17
Sure, that's a possibility. 

AD: 1:07:17-1:07:18
Still. 

IC: 1:07:18-1:07:47
But on the other hand, it could be like I was expecting at least to find signs of her after 1976, even if it's not now, but maybe in the 80s and the 90s. Probably the most likely hypothesis is that she may have remarried and changed her name. At that point, if you don't know the last name, it's really hard to find anything. So that's the situation. 
But so there were not many female students in the... 

AD: 1:07:47-1:07:49
No, there were very few. 

IC: 1:07:49-1:08:12
Did you, at that time at least, did you feel kind of part of a minority? Or it was okay, like you know, you were mainly surrounded by men, male students, a male professor. Did you find, like, "OK, I'm an exception?"
Or you don't even think about that asymmetry at that time? 

AD: 1:08:12-1:08:46
Well, I think the math department wanted all its students. And in its reserved, distant way, it wanted to take care of them. I do remember faculty as being exceedingly polite, considerate, thoughtful, and, what's the word I want, conscientious. And I did not experience chauvinism, except from other students. 

IC: 1:08:46-1:08:55
Uh-huh, okay. So from other students, yes. 

AD:
There was plenty of that. 

IC:
Oh, plenty, okay. Like attitude, like... 

AD: 1:08:55-1:09:25
I do recall being the one woman in an insurance class, there were a bunch of business administration students. And the instructor told an off-color joke at 8 o'clock in the morning. So one of the 100 or so men in the room turned and gawked at me with his mouth open to see how I was receiving this. What a bumpkin!
He was just a little gauche. 

IC: 1:09:25-1:11:56
Yeah, it's a little bit strange to hear the stories that I mean, like these days, because of course, this will be completely unacceptable these days. But I heard a similar story from somebody who became a colleague of Richard at UCLA. Her name is Barbara Partee. And Barbara Partee was Noam Chomsky's first student. So she got her PhD in linguistics with Noam Chomsky in 1965 at MIT. And she told me the story that she and two other women were taking a class in engineering that had to do with things like machine learning. It was one of the first classes where computer science and engineering were applied to language. So they were taking the class and there were three women and probably say about 10, 15 male students in the graduating class. And so we start turning in the assignments and week after week we do better than the guys. And the third week I think the instructor, the professor says, "Guys, this is becoming embarrassing. I mean, you cannot keep doing worse than the women."
And, you know, and she told me, like, "I don't know, I, the three of us look at each other and we felt a little bit like, uh, you know what?"
Clearly, the presupposition there was that, of course, men are better in these things than women. So that's why you guys should feel embarrassed. Which reminds me of what you just said, this kind of attitude of presupposing that this is not a class for women, and therefore women should not do well here. Which is something that, for me, was like a little bit of a discovery. I never experienced anything like this in my experience in college, or of course as an instructor, much less. But I can imagine, yeah. Before doing philosophy in Italy, I was one year at engineering. Then I changed my mind in Milan. And I remember that one problem that a few women, and we're talking about early 90s, there were still very few women doing engineering, had is that there were no bathrooms for women. Because the building had been conceived for men. There was only one bathroom in the basement that had to be reconfigured. So all women had to go downstairs, no matter where they were, in the huge building, they had to go downstairs because it was the only bathroom for them. That was to me like, that sounds a little bit discriminatory. 

AD: 1:11:56-1:12:11
Well it all dated from a much earlier time. I think that Stanford was a real leader in getting women into engineering. One time a quarter of their undergraduates were women, something like that. 

IC: 1:12:11-1:12:34
Definitely these days, yeah. I mean, like these days there is a—I mean, they have all the power and the prestige to create a diverse body to really choose whatever students they want. And in fact, my time at Stanford two years ago I was really surprised by the diversity of their student body. 

AD: 1:12:34-1:12:38
Yeah, they work at it. Get people from all over the world. 

IC: 1:12:38-1:14:12
They can get people. They can get all the best people. And once they get them, they can choose the one that they want. So they can create... And they have the resources. I mean, they have the prestige to capture the attention of these bright students. And then they have the resources to decide, "OK, we want to support this one. We want to support this other one. This is particularly good."
And I went to some of the classes,
And they have wonderful undergraduates. They're really motivated, willing to be pushed. The classes are small. So it was very like, wow!
With respect to UC San Diego, the classes are getting bigger and bigger. And linguistics, UC San Diego is a STEM place. So it's biology, computer science, engineering, bio, biomedicine. Humanities and social sciences have never been, with few exceptions, never been the reason why people go to UC San Diego. Linguistics is in social sciences, so we get the ones, the students that struggle, the students that feel a bit out of place, and they also have to learn to deal with these cases. 
Anne, can I ask you, you mentioned, I see that there is a box. 

AD:
Yes. 

IC:
Do you mind if we go through some of it or what the things that you think will be more interesting? 

AD:
Be my guest. 

IC:
And any time, then maybe by sometimes by looking at things, you may remember something. Or just no matter whatever association is, feel free to share it. It can always be useful. You want to guide me through it? 

AD: 1:14:12-1:14:39
Sure. (Looking through photos.)
I looked at just this stuff today, trying to remind myself. And what is this? A driver's license, I think. Driver's license, Social Security, this is a square dance. (Oh!) The thing we were in. Roadrunners. This is something we did in the 60s. Well, we did it all the time we were married, as a matter of fact. 

IC: 1:14:39-1:14:43
I see. So, arts and science. 

AD: 1:14:43-1:14:44
The Woodwind Quintet. 

IC: 1:14:44-1:14:58
Ah-ha!
The Musical Electronics Engineer, Materiologist, Astronomer, [unintelligible], Mathematician. Oh! So, you guys created a musical quintet? 

AD: 1:14:58-1:15:04
Yes. We at first played in this man's home. 

IC: 1:15:04-1:15:05
Yes. 

AD: 1:15:05-1:15:09
And later on we played in our home. 

IC: 1:15:09-1:15:13
So was this something that already existed or the five of you guys created it? 

AD: 1:15:13-1:16:22
Let's see, this one, a little prehistory. Paul had been living with some other bachelors in the home of a musical couple. He started playing the recorder, the bass recorder. In high school or in school, he had played the clarinet a little bit, but his clarinet teacher went off to war. 
So Paul was musical. He could read music. He liked music. And just at the time we met, he was starting to play bassoon. And so when I learned that, I got out my oboe, which I had set aside for some years. 
These people were SRI people. They were Paul's colleagues. And so one thing led to another, but after a time, we were having quintets in our home every week, and I'm still having quintets in our home every week and I'm still having quintets here although I don't play in it any longer. I had to retire from playing the oboe last October, about a year ago, because my hearing is getting so bad I couldn't tune to the flute, couldn't tune to a tuner. 

IC: 1:16:29-1:16:31
But there's still somebody playing? Is there a quintet here in the complex? 

AD: 1:16:31-1:16:39
No, they're all from the outside. Some are quite young. They range from their 20s up to me. 

IC: 1:16:39-1:16:54
Wow! You kept the tradition alive. That's great. 
So talking about Paul and music, so you mentioned that when he was in St. Mary's, he started playing the clarinet, that's what you said? 

AD: 1:16:54-1:16:56
The clarinet, I think, was earlier. 

IC: 1:16:56-1:17:30
Earlier, okay. So which means he had interest in music earlier, before going to St. Mary's. Then he went to St. Mary's, and my understanding is that St. Mary's did not have any structured musical education, at least looking at the classes they were offering. I didn't see anything that looked like music. But then I guess he and Richard managed to create a space, or some sort of space, because I don't even know if the choir existed before them. 

AD: 1:17:30-1:17:32
My impression is they created it. 

IC: 1:17:32-1:17:55
Yeah, because I've not been able to find any evidence except then at a certain point in their junior year, if you look at the yearbooks. So now you start having a picture of the choir. Before there were all the pictures of the various associations, and there was no picture of the choir. And then in the junior year, you have a picture of the choir. And then the senior year, you have the picture, the one that I shared with you, the one where you see Paul and Richard and so on. 

AD: 1:17:55-1:17:57
And Richard is conducting. 

IC: 1:17:57-1:18:03
And Richard is conducting. So my impression is that this came from them. Like, they were the one that started it. 

AD: 1:18:03-1:18:05
That's what I thought, yeah. 

IC: 1:18:05-1:18:25
So do you have a sense of, so when Paul went to high school, so his clarinet teacher had already left for war. This was before the, actually, hold on. So he went to high school. They started high school in 1943. Yeah, that's correct. 

AD: 1:18:25-1:18:26
43. 

IC: 1:18:26-1:18:55
43, yes, so that was during the war. So he goes to high school and I wonder, like, probably Richard must have been the most musically gifted among his classmates. I asked around if anybody else remembered, like, anybody that was musically gifted and all of them told me, "Well, Paul and Richard, they were the two people."
So probably, maybe that could have been another reason why they connected, because they shared this passion. 

AD: 1:18:55-1:19:14
Yes. Yes, it seems. And growing up on the farm, the Depression and then the war, Paul's aunt had a little parlor organ I think which she played. She had had instruction when she was young and he recalls that she played it, and maybe she played it in church. I don't recall that. 

IC: 1:19:15-1:19:34
So actually one thing that I wanted to ask you when you were telling about your family and then Paul's family. So in your family, it looks like at least your parents maybe even your grandmother, but definitely your parents went to Berkeley, so went to college. What about Paul's family? Did they go to college? Did Paul's parents... 

AD: 1:19:34-1:19:46
His father, no. His uncle did spend some time at Davis. Okay. His mother, yes, she went to COP. (Okay.)
She graduated from COP. 

IC: 1:19:46-1:20:19
Because I was trying to get a sense of like, my impression, but correct me if I'm wrong, my impression is that your family's experience and partially Paul's family's experience was not the default in those days. Like, for people of your parents' generation to go to college, and a college like Berkeley was not the default. These days, almost everybody goes to college in the US. But those days, I mean, probably you had to be from a certain kind of family with a certain tradition to go to college. Is this correct? 

AD: 1:20:19-1:20:36
Yes, I think so. The proportion of people attending college is very much greater. When my father went to school in the 20s, perhaps, I don't know, one high school graduate in ten might go to college. Now the hope at least is to have something post-secondary for everybody. 

IC: 1:20:36-1:22:41
Because that's something that was triggered by what you were telling me, is the fact that I reconstructed Montague's family, like both the mother's side and the father's side, and it was a very different background. So Montague's parents did not go to college. His mother went to high school. She was one of the best students in high school in Lompoc, and that's it. His father didn't even go to the regular high school. His father went to... I think he went to eighth grade and then joined some sort of professional school. That's what I think when he entered... It was the professional school that prepared him for the telephone company. I think he joined the telephone company very early on. 

AD:
Oh how interesting, I wonder what it was. Was it...? 

IC:
It was called "preparatory school."
At a certain point somewhere, I'm trying to remember which document, he mentioned preparatory school. Yes, it was in the, so it's the information coming from the census. Every 10 years, they would collect this information and then it must become public information after 71 years. So which means the last census that is available for everybody to use, and these days everything is online, is 1940. So I was able to follow the mother and the father from when they were born until 1940 at least on the census information. And so from there you can see that, you know, one of the questions they ask is "What's the highest degree that you have received?"
And so by the age of 20, 20-something, in the census of the 1920, Montague's mother had like high school as the highest. He had eighth grade. And then he started, he was able to retire relatively young from the telephone company after many years of service. So I assume that he had started very, very young. 

AD: 1:22:41-1:22:44
Do you know what kind of work he did with the phone company? 

IC: 1:22:44-1:23:15
Yeah, so he started from the very bottom. He started with what I think is called installer, part of a team and really, in those days, you had to bring the cable to the house and so on. And then all the way until the end, when he became a foreman, probably at least I talked to somebody who joined the Pacific Telephone Company in Stockton the year Montague's father retired, actually was one of Paul's classmates, Ed Barakat. 

AD: 1:23:15-1:23:17
Barakat? Eddie Barakat. 

IC: 1:23:17-1:27:24
Eddie Barakat, yes. So I had a very nice interview with him. And he told me, "Yes, I started in 1948", which probably is the year when Edgar Montague retired. And so he explained a little bit to me how it worked within the Pacific Telephone Company. So when I showed him the title, I said, yeah, probably at that point he had enough seniority that probably he wouldn't go out with the team. He would be the one coordinating the teams and "Say, okay, you go and you do this kind of job, you do this kind of job."
So by the end, I can see also from the income that he declared in the last census, which is 1940, and you compare on the other people on the street, you see the difference. So he was making $1,500 a month. The people, the other top-ranked income earner on the very same street were making half of his money. So, once you do the adjustments, I mean, it's not a tremendous salary, but it would be like somebody living in Stockton these days and making around $75,000 a year, which it doesn't make you wealthy, but in Stockton you can have a decent life. Plus, both he and his wife declared that they had more than $500 of savings. 
So, I think it shows the status of, I would say, middle class with only one child, and definitely aspiring to go higher on the social scale. You see that they moved and reconstructed the various houses where they lived in Stockton. So they went from South Stockton, which was the working class neighborhood, progressively up to the nice area where the nice upper middle class, white upper middle class would live. Until the very last house, which they bought when Richard went to St. Mary's, was two blocks from St. Mary's. They sold it when they moved to Berkeley and I was able to find the document that showed the price that was paid for that house, which was pretty remarkable. In 1948 they managed to sell the house for $14,000. $14,000 is a very expensive house. Unfortunately, the house has been destroyed to build a medical facility. But it looked like it was a very nice house. 
And so there is this, my impression is that especially coming from the mother, I think Richard realized the dream that she had, which was the dream number one of studying and going up the social scale. And there is an episode that I was able to find it. The husband of Richard's cousin, unfortunately she died three years ago, but he's still alive. And they were visiting Richard's mother when she was alive and Richard too and he remember this time that way they went they were living in the condo, like the apartment complex. And they went to see Lorraine and Lorraine, it was like in the mid 60s, and Lorraine said "Oh Richard is waiting for us he wants to show you the new place that he got the house on Mulholland Drive."
I still remember how proud she was and we were right there Richard was waiting for us and we entered this house you know I heard about Mulholland Drive and we entered this house, two level, this beautiful view, and I could see Lorraine was all like... 
So I think somehow that this strange son that they, you know, with their very special, I think, capacity that parents may have to connect to their children, no matter how strange they are. In particular her, she was definitely, I think, like... Richard was part of herself, was something that she was extremely proud of, so I can't even imagine how she must have felt when he died. 

AD: 1:27:25-1:27:27
An interesting history. 

IC: 1:27:27-1:30:10
Yeah, definitely. To me it's kind of strange to, like, you know, the way I met Richard was intellectually, by studying his work and by, you know, becoming a researcher in the field and [father??? 1:27:40]. And that's how the project started. And at a certain point I started asking about who was he? I mean like, what do we know about him? And when I discovered that very little was known I thought this would be strange, somebody that has such an important intellectual presence that affected my life and the life of many others but still we don't know anything about him. And that's when I started the inquiry, I was a graduate student and then I started collecting information. And a picture started to emerge. I said, "Okay, this is a man that is even more interesting than I thought. He's not just really intellectually gifted, but there is a complexity and a richness. There is a story to tell."
But then I thought, I mean, if I want to become a linguist, nobody's ever going to hire me because I work on Montague's biography. So that's when I put the project aside. And then when I became a professor at San Diego, and six years later I got tenure. I remember I woke up one morning and I said, "If I don't do it now, it's going to be too late."
And that's when the obsession started. 
And it's interesting, I mean, it's kind of fascinating to see this human being emerge from these pieces. It has been an unusual intellectual and also human experience. I got to know lots of wonderful people. Also personally it's been very important for me. I never connected with my grandparents much. It was a different... Well, they died when I was young, first of all, and secondly, we're a different universe. I mean, all my grandparents, with the exception of one, were illiterate. Poor, like, Italian peasants from the South. My parents left the south when they got married to go to Milan as many young couples in the 60s to find a better life and job. That's where my brother and I were born. So we would go back and visit them over the summer but it was a different universe. They also spoke a different language that I learned but it was a different world and by the time I was old enough to be able to connect with them, they had died. And so I never learned to appreciate what it meant to gather this information about a world, which is far away, but is actually partially the world where you come from. And it's been a wonderful gift in a sense. Very learning experience. In particular, like Berkeley. Sometimes I wish I could have been a student then. 

AD: 1:30:10-1:30:13
Well, I have a story. 

IC: 1:30:13-1:30:14
Yeah, please, tell me. 

AD: 1:30:14-1:30:42
My kids, they were getting ready to go off to college. So, where to go to college? And their friends, the same thing. And what the friends' parents wanted for them was small, liberal arts, West Coast, private. So the kid would go off to Reed or Pomona, and after one year they'd be back at Berkeley. It had to be Berkeley. Berkeley was the big time!


IC: 1:30:42-1:33:10
Yeah. I can see that. I mean, it's definitely, it must have been a very, very special place. I mean, I've been talking to all these people that... Dana Scott himself, you know, Dana Scott comes from Stockton. Stockton must have been the place. So he left Stockton at the age of eight. They actually, Richard and Dana went to the very same elementary school. They don't know each other at that point. Dana is four, 1932. So Dana is two years younger than Richard. And then they met in Berkeley. But, you know, they both come from like lower middle class families, in the case of Dana, who has a single mother. And they go to Berkeley and, wow! 
This new universe appears to them. From a certain point of view, for you it was like, "Okay, this is an environment that I know already and I can appreciate it better because now I'm here more frequently", but for them it must have really been a different universe. In the case of Richard, not only did he discover his own intellectual gifts, but for him he acquired friends that stayed and remained his friends for the rest of his life. He got close to the poetry scene from the English department, which was a very lively poetry scene. A group of people from the English department would be the one that's going to create, like, 10 years later, will create the San Francisco Renaissance, City Lights, and so on. I mean, they come from there. And Richard was part of that group. In fact, I went to check some of their biographies, and Richard is mentioned. So you can see the engagement at many, many levels. Like, you know, he works as an organist. He has all these friends. Berkeley is the place where you're gathering people, having parties over the weekend, and you discover a different kind of music, the European influence because of these professors coming from Europe, or the artists coming from Europe after the war, and also this broadening of Berkeley because of these professors coming from Europe, or the artists coming from Europe after the war, and also this broadening of Berkeley because of the after war effect, the GI bills, and some older students joining campus. (Yes.)
It must have been a very unusually mixed and vibrant community with respect to what many of the students were used to coming from the farms, or just even if they were coming from town, but places like Stockton, even Sacramento, probably was definitely not like Berkeley. 

AD: 1:33:10-1:33:11
Yeah. 

IC: 1:33:11-1:33:14
Must have been full of life and energy and creativity. 

AD: 1:33:14-1:33:31
Yeah. At that time, it was probably the intellectual hub of California. I'll call it the San Francisco–Berkeley axis. But LA was coming along also. 

IC: 1:33:31-1:34:33
Yeah, and for example, in those years, like we're talking about the late 40s, early 50s, was also the time when the artistic scene in San Francisco was developing. The movie scene–later on she became a famous critic for, I think, The New Yorker, her name was Pauline Kael. Pauline Kael started in San Francisco, opening with her husband a little essay, like, artsy theater, showing these movies. And actually, one of Richard's closest friends was also one of Pauline Kael's closest friends. And Richard became very passionate about movies, certain kind of movies that he liked, and others that he didn't like. So there are all these, like, the music scene, big bands coming to San Francisco, opera, classical music, to Berkeley, San Francisco. So for somebody who wanted to be stimulated intellectually and musically,


AD: 1:34:34-1:34:43
Yes, San Francisco was so close. I remember going to concerts at San Francisco. Isaac Stern, Jan Pierce, and so forth. 

IC: 1:34:43-1:34:58
Wow, okay, I chose the wrong time. So you started this as soon as you got married? 

AD: 1:35:04-1:35:15
I think so. Well, we didn't start. Oh, here's what happened. Some people at SRI advertised they wanted to fill out a quintet. So it just so happened that an oboist and a bassoonist had just married and were available. 


IC:
Perfect!


AD:
Yeah. 

IC: 1:35:20-1:35:24
And did you find anything else that you think would be useful? 

AD: 1:35:24-1:35:37
Oh, not especially. These are pictures of Paul at different times. Let's see, this is his SRI badge. And here he is, a young soldier in Germany. 

IC: 1:35:37-1:35:45
That's when he said he took the break to go to the, so he was already studying at Stanford, but then he said... 

AD: 1:35:45-1:35:46
In 47 he was drafted. 

IC: 1:35:46-1:35:47
He was drafted. 

AD: 1:35:47-1:35:49
And he was in the service for two years. 

IC: 1:35:49-1:35:50
In Germany. 

AD: 1:35:50-1:36:14
In Germany, yes. And he ran a newspaper. Three years having a good time. And while he was there, he met his grandmother, who was a native of Switzerland. She happened to be traveling in Europe, and they met. There are some family pictures of the two of them, feeding pigeons. 

IC: 1:36:14-1:36:24
So she must have been the grandmother from the mother's side? Because DeCarli sounds totally Italian to me. 

AD: 1:36:24-1:36:36
Yes. Decarli. Here's the story the family tells. D-E is French and L-I is Italian. Therefore it must be Swiss. And it is!


IC: 1:36:36-1:36:38
It is? Okay!


AD: 1:36:38-1:36:47
Well, my son and daughter-in-law, traveling in Italy, said this spelling of De Carli is pretty common. Yeah. So that's the story. 

IC: 1:36:47-1:37:14
'De' is the Italian prefix together with 'di'. 'De' and 'di' are the novel prefix, it's like in German 'von'. So, and de Carli is a common name in Northern Italy. Clearly the family was not from Southern Italy. So, you know, in Italy it's still possible, according to your last name, do have an idea where you come from? 

AD: 1:37:14-1:37:26
Well, the family, or this is Paul's story, the family traced their name to the De Carli orphanage. Now this is in Switzerland, it's in Volgorno. 

IC: 1:37:26-1:37:27
Is it like the... 

AD: 1:37:27-1:37:30
Very southern Italian part. 

IC: 1:37:30-1:37:37
Yeah, it's the Italian section of... yeah, that's possible, it's the border with the northern part of Italy. 

AD: 1:37:37-1:37:47
Yeah, further to the story, the town was at the bottom of a canyon like this, you had to farm like this, they came to California and saw its land... 

IC: 1:37:47-1:37:52
So this would have been like in the mid-19th century when they moved to California? 

AD: 1:37:52-1:37:56
A little later, I think in the 1890s, probably. 

IC: 1:37:56-1:38:05
OK, so which means that Paul's parents were born here, maybe, but the grandparents were the ones that immigrated. 

AD: 1:38:05-1:38:18
That's right. His grandmother, his mother's mother was born in Switzerland. His father, his grandfather were born in California. His great-grandfather was born in Switzerland. 

IC: 1:38:18-1:38:34
So, yeah, what have we got? So probably this is the earliest one among the three, is it correct? Well actually probably these are around the same time, is it Paul? 

AD: 1:38:34-1:38:37
Yeah, the time in Germany. 

IC: 1:38:37-1:38:39
Which is right after the graduation. So he went to Stanford in... 

AD: 1:38:39-1:38:49
Two years at Stanford, then he was drafted. And then two years in the service. 

IC: 1:38:49-1:38:59
So probably this is like after 1949. So he went to Stanford in 1947. And then after two years, so this could be 1949 or 1950. 

AD: 1:38:59-1:39:11
48, 47, 48, yeah. This is his first picture, I think, at SRI. And I think he started at SRI in 54. 

IC: 1:39:11-1:39:12
Was that right after graduating? 

AD: 1:39:12-1:39:29
No. It took him a long time to graduate. There was a service and he had just sort of taken his time about filling out a major, filling the major requirements. So I think he started, he graduated after he started work. He managed to-


IC: 1:39:29-1:39:44
Oh, yeah. So in a sense that I was wondering if he had done any other job between the graduation and SRI. But actually, it looks like that he even started working for SRI before he graduated. 

AD: 1:39:44-1:40:08
Yes, he did. He came back. And I don't know what other jobs he had. He said he answered an ad for a temporary laborer's job and got the job and then was offered a longer term position. He was fortunate in that very early in his career he discovered a way to make diamond. It was a great career boost. 

IC: 1:40:08-1:40:11
I can imagine. 

AD: 1:40:11-1:40:13
So he was there for his whole career. 

IC: 1:40:13-1:40:23
I like this picture very much. Can I make a copy of it? I brought my little digital... 

AD: 1:40:23-1:40:24
Sure. You have a folding copier? 

IC: 1:40:24-1:40:27
Yeah, it's a scanner scanner it's a portable scanner


AD: 1:40:27-1:40:32
Oh yes I've seen this. 

IC: 1:40:32-1:41:15
They're very useful and these things they can do a good resolution very good because I want to see which one is the better quality because I had the one from the graduation which unfortunately though the problem with a graduation picture is that they were printed on paper and the paper was not even high quality. So I want to see what the publisher said, because I would like to have at least one picture of Paul. If the publisher thinks that the graduation picture on the yearbook is good quality enough that when you print it you can still see decently. I'm going to use that one because it's closer to the time when they were together. But otherwise this is a very good one and it's definitely, this is the original, so the quality is going to be better. Let me choose the height of the picture. 

AD: 1:41:15-1:41:18
I have a picture of Paul which I think is his high school graduation picture. 

IC: 1:41:18-1:41:25
Oh! 


AD:
We can look in this other room. 

IC:
Sure, sure. I mean, you have the original of the picture? 

AD:
I think so. 

IC:
Oh, that would be fantastic. 

AD: 1:41:25-1:41:26
A print. 

IC: 1:41:26-1:41:36
Yeah, print, print. Because the one that I have is just printed on, you know, it's the tiny one on the book which clearly doesn't have the quality and the resolution that you would expect. Yes. 

AD: 1:41:36-1:41:40
Well, come in and take a look. 

IC: 1:41:41-1:41:42
[Talks in the distance.]

Fantastic yeah, that's the original. Oh yeah. 

AD:
I keep hearing something that sounds like a garage band. 

IC:
Yeah, there is a band. Yeah, somebody is playing. I can hear, so you have the battery, what do you call it, the drums, and then there is an electric guitar, and there is a keyboard. Yeah, somebody is in. 

AD: 1:42:41-1:42:53
I wonder what the occasion is. I suppose it could be radio. 

IC: 1:42:55-1:43:07
But it looks like somebody was playing live. Like a real band. 
[Long pause, some muffled speech.]


AD: 1:43:45-1:43:55
Is it right side up? 

IC: 1:44:36-1:44:41
Oh, you're right. Let's see. It's the right one. Is it correct? 

AD: 1:44:41-1:44:44
It's going to hang. So, yeah. 

IC: 1:44:44-1:44:53
It should be like this. Oh, yeah, it should be like this. I just, it's just a little bit hard. I want to make sure that it should go all the way up there. Oh yes, there it is. 

AD: 1:44:53-1:44:56
Okay, very neat. 

IC: 1:44:56-1:44:57
Can I hang it? 

AD: 1:44:57-1:45:07
Sure. 
[Pause]


IC: 1:45:14-1:45:27
That's really great. 

AD: 1:45:27-1:45:30
Let's see if there's anything else of interest. 

IC: 1:45:30-1:46:02
Because those yearbooks are very useful for the information that you find. Unfortunately, especially those years, they were not printed very well. Like, they would use, like, cheap paper, cheap printing. I mean, it's better than nothing, but then what Oxford University Press, the publisher, told me is that if the quality is not high enough, when you print them on another piece of paper, you won't be able to basically see anything. So I said, "Okay, I'll do my best, you know, guys. I'm fighting with whatever is available."


AD: 1:46:02-1:46:21
So this looks like medical stuff. [Shuffling through papers.]
What is all this about? Let's see if we can figure it out. This looks like certificates. Cal debt loan... 

IC: 1:46:36-1:46:45
Let's see the date... 1960. 

AD:
So that's when we bought a house. 

IC:
Oh yeah, oh so it's a certificate, I think this is, it looks like a certificate of veterans from the office of the... That's when you bought the house then. 

AD: 1:46:45-1:46:56
That's right. And so this may be... Let's see if we can figure out what this is. Looks...separation from the army? 

IC: 1:46:56-1:47:26
Yeah, looks like one of those, yes. Let's see... Yeah, character of separation. Report armed forces of the United States. Yes, yes, that's a separation. Yep. 

AD:
What is the date? 

IC:
The date is... date of appointment, effective date of separation. So it was September 28, 1954. That's the effective date. 

AD: 1:47:26-1:47:27
54? 

IC: 1:47:27-1:47:28
That's what it says here. 

AD: 1:47:28-1:47:32
That's much later than I thought. I wonder if that was from the reserve. 

IC: 1:47:32-1:47:48
Oh, actually, yes. What it says is that what kind of separation right next to it, it says it's separation, relief from active military service. I don't know if that means being in the reserve? 

AD: 1:47:48-1:47:55
I think, yes, I think when you left the active army at that time you were in the reserve, whether you wanted to be or not. 

IC: 1:47:55-1:48:30
Yeah, yeah. I think by default they would keep you there. And I think this is probably the one that says that, yeah, let's see... 1950... Employment... It says dates of last civilian employment from October 50 to October 52, main civilian occupation... main civilian occupation......Horseshoe Man? What's a Horseshoe Man? 

AD: 1:48:30-1:48:33
It wouldn't have been Beale's Greenhouse, would it? 

IC: 1:48:33-1:48:42
Oh! The name and address of the last civilian employer, John Bell, Palo Alto, California. 

AD: 1:48:42-1:48:44
I think that was the greenhouse. 

IC: 1:48:44-1:49:00
Oh, okay, yes. From 1950 to 1952. That's probably...that was his last date of last civilian employment and then it looks like in 1954 he was finally released from the army. 

AD: 1:49:00-1:49:06
Yeah, well he was lucky. A lot of people who were World War II veterans also served in the Korean War. 

IC: 1:49:06-1:49:07
Yep, yep. 

AD: 1:49:10-1:49:16
So what is this? I don't know. See if it's something interesting. 


IC: 1:49:18-1:49:31
Diploma. Wow, powerful. 

IC
Oh no, is it a diploma? No. 

AD
Oh, it's a family... 


IC:
...history. Oh, the De Carli... 
