HK: 0:00:00-0:03:26
I've written to him because I hadn't been in touch for a while, I just sort of wanted to ask how he was. And he wrote back with a problem that has been on his mind for a very long time. And that is the following, it's translated in English but it's not perfect, is the following paradigm: "You can say John is taller than Bill, John is shorter than Bill, John is five inches taller than Bill, John is five inches shorter than Bill, John is five feet tall, but you cannot say he's five feet short. That's the paradigm, how do you explain this?"

And so we got involved, you know, as you know, I worked in etics a long time ago.

IC:
Oh yeah, I mean you went back too.

HK:
So we got interested, I got interested first and then (Antje???, 1:26) sort of also. And so it grew into a kind of common project with Manfred???. And it's led to I think in important ways quite a different theory from what there has been in the market so far and so what it, what distinguishes it from other kinds of scalar adjectives is first the treatment of the scales, then the distributive morphology approach to the syntax of the different adjectival forms, all generated from roots and different forms of roots generated from the same root. And the kind of, you know, sort of standard, originally sort of Chomksy-like LF syntax that we, that we use in order to get to the semantics. And, and then also the way in which the semantic representations are conceived with the different forms. And so we have an account of why in this paradigm "five feet short" is peculiar, and some people don't accept it at all, in terms of, well, so the basic idea---and it's quite different from most accounts of this in the literature---that if you try to create five feet short, the way one can create five feet tall so as to make it come out right, what goes wrong with five feet short is that you actually that the semantic construction leads to an interval that starts at zero and then goes to the left rather than the right. And there is no left.

IC: 0:03:26-0:03:27
I see, I see.

HK: 0:03:27-0:05:04
So when we actually got to this, I think at that point I was still in my own, but we were actually quite pleased. And so I don't know how much you know of the literature, but there is a very strong group, a subgroup, who treats this problem by saying that if you have a negative adjective, like short or small, then its extension is not intervals that go from zero to the maximal degree, but rather for the maximal degree to infinity. And then I have a story why that goes wrong with...we combine that with a measure phrase, which is because all these intervals are infinite, so you can't measure them. And I never really believed in this, and I still don't believe in it today. I mean, it's a kind of artifact of a particular way of going above the semantics of adjectives which started quite early on. So originally it was just in order to deal with problems in the semantics of the complement clauses to comparatives. And so that's why they got into these intervals. And then they found that if you negate such a formula, that one natural way is to give the negation just a complement of the non-negated form of the adjective. And so that's all the other intervals.

IC: 0:05:05-0:07:25
Yeah, it's kind of this work. That's what I was familiar with. And I do remember that in dealing with these cases, there was some kind of semi-postulation of this kind of interval, like what justifies it. On the other hand, actually, if I understand your approach correctly, it nicely fits also with our, you know, a relatively common assumption that when you're talking to numerals you have by default an "at least" interpretation. And then pragmatic constraints restricts to the "exact" interpretation and that will be compatible in terms of directionality because the "at least," it goes from from this level from this degree from this measure up. In your case, like what, you cannot go up you can only go down it becomes incompatible and there is a natural limit. So that's nice.

That also makes the nice prediction that, and I think that literature partially recognizes that this is a general, I mean---you need to see how measure phrases are built in various languages---but whenever you can find something that resemble what we just discussed, you find the same pattern. (Yeah.) Like, you know, so it means that it's not really related to something specific of the morphosyntax, but it's really some general property of, on the one hand, the way these, you know, inverse adjectives behave and when they combine with the measure phrase. (Yeah.) So that would be a very nice and elegant way. 

HK:
Yeah. So this is in general...

IC:
But ask, can I ask you? No, no, can I ask you? Because that was something that was in my mind last night because your interest in adjectives goes back all the way back to when you were still at UCLA, do I remember correctly? You had conversation with Terry Parsons about this? Do I remember correctly? Montague seems, to at a a certain point---I don't want to mix things because, remember the paper, which must be English as a Formal Language, where it says, you know, I'm not dealing with this, but my student, Hans Kamp, and Terence Parson have been talking have been developing ideas. Hello?

(Hans responds to a phonecall)

HK: 0:07:25-0:07:47
Yeah, go on. You were in the middle of something. 
IC: 0:07:48-0:08:11
Oh no, I was saying like I seem to remember that, and I think it's English as a Formal Language, there is a footnote in which Montague makes reference to work that you've been discussing, you and Terence Parson have been developing about something that is not going to be treated in that paper. And I do believe that there was adjectives. Do I remember correctly?

HK: 0:08:11-0:09:12
Absolutely. So as far as Terry Parsons is concerned, I don't think I was ever in touch with him directly while I was at UCLA. But Montague must have known of this work at least at the time when this paper was published. I think that may actually have been after I left. The paper was written in, I think 1967, and this is a paper that my input into was the least insignificant. And one of the things that I really did contribute was this idea that in order to get a general theory of adjectives, you would have to treat them as functions from NP meanings to other NP meanings, properties of properties. And so that also covers these cases of "alleged" and "fake".

IC: 0:09:12-0:09:12
Yep.

HK: 0:09:13-0:11:40
And various kinds of adjectives that are subsective in the sense that AN entails N. And so there is this footnote in there and when, this was in 73, what had been on my mind since I left from the time I left UCLA was that I might be, sorry, and at that point it was already clear, well, so say especially after 71, after Montague had died, but even before it had to be, the kind of contribution that any could make through this general program of Montague grammar was to see how it could be extended to constructions that sort of resisted the most straightforward elaboration. And vagueness was one of them.

And then in 73 I actually wrote this paper that came out in 75. It's the two adjectives paper. And so there the question was asked, well, in many cases, these adjectives, all the subsective ones, even though there are big differences between them, it feels like you really have here predicates that depend for the evaluation on context. And in those cases where the predicate occurs pre-nominally, the noun that they proceed or are satellites of is the main factor of the context that determines the comparison class, as we will put it now. And then so that paper and this paper by Kit Fine, who's a professor at the University of Washington. They were written independently, although we knew each other quite well at the time. And then I remember sometimes getting together and asking each other what we were doing and he found out that he had written that paper and I had written mine and then they both came out two years later more or less at the same time but they go back to pretty much the same.

IC: 0:11:40-0:13:08
Can I ask you about this about the genesis of this thinking that brought you to that paper? In 1967 you and Montague went to Amsterdam, to that conference or that workshop that Barry Lal??? (11:59) organized (yeah.) and I don't know how much you remember of it but Staal actually published the proceedings (yeah.) and we you know quite a bit of the conversation that was going on. And one of the things that stayed in my mind is that Montague was very dismissive about almost everybody, all the remarks, in particular, people that were saying, you know, "how can you define the notion of truth when it depends on context?" You know, there was no problem. The only time he replies with an amount of seriousness is when a very young Dummett raises the issue of vagueness. And he admits that vagueness is a serious issue. He says, "you know, at the moment I don't have an answer. Professor Tarski told me that there are a couple of his students, and I think he even mentioned a name or something, that are working on it." But that's it. So it's the only time when you feel that Montague is really feeling that an observation that has been made touches on a serious issue, an issue that he has not an answer for. I wonder, first of all, if you were there when this kind of conversation happened, and if either you were really thinking about vagueness, or if this may have inspired you even more to keep thinking about this as a serious issue when you start, when you want to develop a framework of fully compositional analysis?

HK: 0:13:08-0:14:40
I doubt very much that at that point I had any idea about how to deal with vagueness. I mean, yeah, I, okay, I was there when Montague made the point and Nunn??? (13:21) had made the point for him and yes, that was a serious issue, but it did not become an issue until much later and I now don't remember exactly what triggered it but---so when I actually started writing the paper in 73---but what I do know is I knew Dummett reasonably well already since the time I had been in Amsterdam, so in early 60s. I didn't know him well, but that's the first time I met him. It was a logic colloquium that he and John Crossley organised in Oxford in 63, I think it was, or 64. And then, I mean, I'd read a number of papers. I thought it was absolutely perverse, right? And then, in fact, when I gave this, well, the main content of the paper, it was at a conference in 1963, somewhere also in Windsor Park, there was some workshop, it was actually very well attended.

IC: 0:14:41-0:14:45
Sorry, Hans, you said 1963. You went 1973.

HK: 0:14:45-0:14:50
73, sorry. 

IC: 0:14:50-0:14:54
No, no, because earlier you said 63 for the conference. (Yeah, yeah, yeah.) OK, so it's when basically the paper was really in your mind.

HK: 0:14:54-0:15:15
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it was already more or less written. And then I can't remember exactly why it was left. I'm not very good at publishing. But so then in 75 I gave a more mature version of it at this huge conference that Cian(???, 15:20) organised.

IC: 0:15:15-0:15:21
Oh, the Cian??? conference, the one in England? 

HK:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

IC:
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. 

HK:
It actually appeared in the proceedings.

IC:
In the proceedings. Oh, that's why it appeared there. Now I understand. Oh, okay, I see.

HK: 0:15:21-0:21:22
Anyway, so in 73, at this conference, they had Dummett as the one to preside over that. It was not a session, it was just, I think, my talk. He was meant to also reply to it. And I was very impressed by how well he had understood what the whole thing was. I also still remember one thing that I wouldn't endorse now anymore either was to treat these vague predicates as context dependent and then try to reconstruct the semantics of the comparatives of this structure of context dependence and of these vague predicates. So you can refine the context and then the gap and also the approximated linearity gets sharper and sharper, basically the idea. And he said he did not actually believe in that, and that the comparative was either the basis for all the constructors, including the positive, or otherwise otherwise, I think this is roughly the way put it, at least it was independently grounded. And so that goes much more in the direction of this idea that yeah these adjectives are fundamentally to place.

And that's very much in, so I'm finally coming back to what I'm doing here. So there is this view that was around for a very long time and basically was very generally accepted until Chris Kennedy came about. And actually even Kennedy can be seen as a confirmation of it. And that's the view that if you first just look at positives and comparatives of adjectives, they are basically of the same structure, but the only difference is that with the comparative you present the entity with which a comparison is made explicitly through the "than" clause, whereas in the case of the positive that second argument is implicit and must be filled or interpreted as something like a standard or norm for the given adjective in the given context given by the comparison class or something like that.

And so I never did anything with this comment of Dummett at the time, but was full aware, became even more aware of it that he actually had thought about it a very great deal before it. And when these two papers, Kit's and mine, appeared in 75, his appeared in a special issue of ([sɪ'dɛz]???, 18:55) which was entirely devoted to vagueness. And there was in particular, one of Dummett's outstanding papers, a paper by Dummett could Wang's paradox. Wang, the Chinese, Hao Wang, the logician. And that's about, it's a predicate "small" for numbers. Actual numbers. And that actually has a kind of, this one paragraph, the essence of the super valuation theory. So, Dummett had that much longer, that paper went back to the 71 or 70 or something. And I don't know, Kit was much more closely, I mean, they were both in Oxford, I think he knew Dummett very much more. I don't know to what extent his was really the sort of base on on Dummett's ideas. Mine was not really. It was just much later. But anyway, so Kits' paper actually is in the spirit, it's also more logical and philosophical than mine, I suppose, in the sense that mine is a very strong linguistic concern. But so Kit's paper, which is, I think, actually also on the, very clearly on the seminal contributions in this area, actually was much more, I felt, feel in the spirit of what in the spirit of what Dummett was doing and what he was thinking. Anyway, so coming back to this idea that is to some extent present also in the supervaluation approaches to the positives of adjectives, that they are not that far away from the comparatives in so far as in both cases some kind of comparison is being made, that you also find in a document which I find more astounding each time you look at it. That's a very long paper by Bierwisch on adjectives called the Semantics of Gradation. And it appeared in, this is the book where it appeared, and it was the paper.

IC:
Oh, I see, Dimensional Adjectives.

HK:
It's actually very good. There's another paper by A. R. Blunt in there about Dimensional Adjectives, which is also... This is actually, I mean, so this was the time it came out in 89, but it was still all written when Bierwisch was still locked up more or less in the DDR. And and so he was one of the actually only linguists there that had direct contact with the West, especially with the with the USA. And so actually he was also left out, well, the luck of being married to somebody who they could retain so as to make sure they would come back. But so he was actually let out already in the late 70s. I think his first visit was to the Max Planck Institute in Nijmegen. And then he was also part of a group of people that at the at the behavioral sciences center in Stanford.

IC: 0:22:36-0:22:39
Oh, so they allowed him to travel all the way to the U.S.?

HK: 0:22:39-0:22:42
Yeah, and it was a great exception.

IC: 0:22:42-0:22:45
Oh, wow. And he went back?

HK: 0:22:45-0:22:47
Yeah, yeah. Well, his wife was there.

IC: 0:22:47-0:22:58
Oh, the wife was there. And I thought, okay. The wife didn't travel with him. I see. 

HK:
Oh, yeah. No, no, okay. No question about it.

IC:
Okay, now I see.

HK: 0:22:58-0:25:17
Well, that's... Yeah, so this was a group that was actually... My career has also played an important, really important part that was organized by Stan Peters. And so it brought together philosophers and linguists and politicians. And so the main conception or idea for us, this was the academic year 81, 82, to bring, to focus on a kind of comparison between situation semantics and DIT, which were both sort of, yeah, I mean, from the last one or two years and still. And it wasn't a complete success in the sense that we had actually committed ourselves to writing a book and it never happened. And it is also I think that both sides somehow misconceived what not only was the others the other ones project was but also what one's own was to some extent.  The two misconceptions were actually very important. (Mulitply the layers...) So it led to what I later realised as a completely false kind of competition between the two. So they're both concerned with partial information, well that's alright, but from a completely different point of view, I mean this situation semantics, from the point of view, it's basically focused on ontology, it's the models that are different, the classical models of wanting your grammar to be replaced by these situations. Nothing to do with the actual form and language. And you can, I've actually once wrote a paper, it was more or less, I've never done anything with it...you can actually develop a situation semantics with DIT just as well as you can develop the classical model theory. And then you see exactly what they have in common and what they don't have in common and in what sense that can also be complementary.

IC: 0:25:17-0:25:20
So you wrote a paper on this? Did you publish it?

HK: 0:25:20-0:25:21
Yeah, I did.

IC: 0:25:21-0:25:25
Would you mind sharing? Okay, I'll write it note to myself so ask Hans.

HK: 0:25:25-0:27:01
It's not really finished but most of it I think is probably readable. And it might be a good occasion to try and sort of wind it up completely. Now, so anyway, that was an occasion where Stan had also invited Bierwisch and I let him out and he came not for the whole year but for about three months. That's when I first met him.

And, anyway so this paper was written after that. So he had that kind of contact, but nevertheless, I mean, he was completely educated in the DDR and largely land-locked in there. It is absolutely amazing how much he managed to develop out of his own abilities. And if you compare that with everything that's done in there, the totality of what's done, with what was subsequently done in mostly the US on graded or scalar adjectives, there is so much that's sort of already seen quite clearly here. And quite a bit more too. It's a very long paper, it's about 200 pages.

IC: 0:27:02-0:27:06
So it's a monograph. 

HK: 0:27:08-0:27:17
Yeah, yeah, yeah, right. I'm trying to remember. From 75 to 200...75 to 250.

IC:
Yeah, and it's also dense because I see that the font is not…

HK: 0:27:22-0:32:59
Yeah there's a lot on one page. Anyway, so in the end, we made a decision, I still don't know that it's final, to write something by the three of us. And, well actually, of the documents there, I've done all the writing. And I'm not even sure to what extent, he's been very nice about it, but it's now difficult to communicate with him because he's very deaf so you can't (You cannot talk.) you cannot talk on the phone and so Zoom is no good either. You can talk with him, and even then you notice that it's difficult for him sometimes to process what you are saying when you speak very slowly  and face to face. So the last time that he and I met was when I was in Berlin in June and a common friend, Wolfgang Klein, so he very kindly offered his flat for us to meet. But the time before that he came to Antje's little house and we sat in the garden. So that works all right, but it's really the only way to communicate apart from writing letters.

And so, we have actually, this is one of the things I've been trying to deal with in the last week or so. Part of what he's doing in this paper, the monograph, is also formulating a very abstract algebraic notion of scale. And there you notice that that's not his cup of tea. I mean, these are not very complicated mathematical structures, but you have to be very careful what you're doing, and it's just not up to scratch. And that sort of somewhat negatively affects also, not as badly as it could have been still to some extent the applications of that to particular examples that the book is primarily concerned with and so one of the things that I discovered much later than was ideal, that sort of come to me that you could deal with this "20 centimeters short" problem in the way I just described, was that actuall, that too is already in this document if you look at it the right way! But it's difficult to recognize just because there is a lot that sort of surrounds that isn't quite right and makes it very difficult to really appreciate the insight. But has this idea that one of the violations that are involved in these "20 centimeter short" cases is precisely that you land left of zero. 

IC:
Oh, it's already there!

HK:
Yeah, yeah. But it takes, because I actually spent months, two years ago in the summer to go through this whole thing. And we thought we understood it and now I now realise that they did this, only very partially. But there was already considerable progress on, I mean I've looked at it before. So it's difficult to really appreciate all that's in there. And I think that's also the reason why it's been used in the literature far less than it deserves. I mean, people refer to it, especially Kennedy, in many places, but one has the impression he hasn't really understood everything either.

And so what I've just been doing is actually trying to explain, and I, the idea is to send that to him also, exactly how this Semantics of Gradation actually deals with this particular problem since that was the thing that got this whole ball rolling. And so that's why I also am somewhat critical, express myself somewhat critically because I've just been fighting all these things that make it so hard to understand what's really going on there. So that's, I did a bit of that. 

IC:
Do you have a deadline for that?

HK:
No, no. I mean, the time should not be too far where we can send this whole thing that we've got off as a book manuscript. And at the same time, I would very much like at least this one problem to be cast in a form short enough to submit as a paper.

IC: 0:32:59-0:35:17
Yeah, I think it would be important because unfortunately, you know that better than me, something that I noticed in our field, and probably it's not just our field that if you write a book, no matter how many wonderful ideas you have in that book, the circulation of those ideas actually may be damaged by the fact that it's a book format. Because one says "Well, there is a 200 page book. Sure looks very interesting, but I don't have time now to read---let me put it there!" and and then, you know you have a 20 page paper, so "Well, let me take a quick look" and then "Oh wow! This is like...let me check that..." and unfortunately, and since things are getting even worse these days because people are even busier there is more pressure and so on, unfortunately I was discussing with Gennaro Chierchia about this. He has exactly the same impression. He loves books because they give him space to develop ideas, but on the other hand, you realize that readers are even fewer. You can have great ideas and then they get completely ignored, or problematic ideas that don't get discussed just because people say, "W"ell, in order for me to get to chapter 5, need to read all the previous chapters so I'm not doing it right now" and then it never happens again. So I think it's a great idea especially for this specific topic too. Hans, can I ask you like in your initial thinking about adjective, especially when you gave Montague the suggestion of treating adjectives as functions from noun phrases to noun phrases, you know, Inés (??? 32:28) I assume that was already in what he presented, he had a treatment of adverbs as functions from verb phrases to verb phrases that in a certain way paralleled this treatment. (Yeah, yeah.) Now, do you remember in your conversation with Montague about this treatment of adverbs, if there was anything that either was directly or indirectly mentioned in the work that I believe around the very same time Davidson was developing, because for him adverbs, certain kinds of adverbs were fundamental in order to push his agenda. What is unclear to me are two things: First of all, you know, of course now we know the dates when papers are published, but you know, that doesn't necessarily mean the circulation of the paper or when people read the paper. Have you ever heard Montague, or do you remember Montague making reference to this kind of approach where events play a role and, you know...

HK: 0:35:17-0:35:59
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I do remember quite clearly. This must have been, I guess it was in 68, there was a conference in Stanford that was organized, I think that was the time when Davidson was still in Stanford, and it was organized by him and Gil Harman. And it has a number of very famous people in there. And it led to this very thick proceedings called, what was it called? Something with semantics.

IC: 0:35:59-0:36:04
I know what you're talking about. I do have the proceedings in my office. I was able to find a copy. I know what you're referring to.

HK: 0:36:04-0:38:51
Yeah. Anyway, so that's where, in the proceedings, that's where the logical form of action sentences first appeared. And Davidson gave that paper at that conference. And I still remember Montague coming back and telling me "There's this man Davidson there in Stanford and he really actually seems to be quite good!" And and he brought one some version of that paper with him, and I cannot much remember now whether that version was very different from the paper as it later appeared. But anyway, that was when my attention was first drawn to Davidson. It was actually the first time I really heard about Davidson. And, yeah, so I got that from him. So his impression was very positive.

It is interesting though that, I mean that's because between then and when he died it was such a short period, but looking back it's actually very curious that in these three papers on natural language, so English as a Formal Language and Universal Grammar and PTQ, there is virtually nothing about tense. In PTQ, there is the operator H for the past tense, and that's about it, I think. I can't even remember now, but there's also something about the future. But in any case, there's nothing about events as arguments of verbs. And given that he already knew in 68 about this Davidson paper and appreciated it. And that he was so much interested, had been interested in tense, maybe also an aspect of some, certainly in tense and temporal reference from the time at least when Cocchiarello was starting his dissertation, that I've always found curious. And it may have, I don't know what could be behind it, maybe that changing to an architecture where verbs are systematically treated as having events or spaces or arguments is something that really requires a lot of extra work. And in PTQ that was not the focus anyway.

IC: 0:38:51-0:43:09
I can offer a key in that direction. Because at the conference you are referring to, the one that Davidson and Harman organized, if I remember correctly, was in the spring of 1968. (Yeah, that sounds right.) So Montague was working on English as a Formal Language, finishing the paper, because he presented the paper in October in Italy at the conference, the big Olivetti conference. Now, who was in the session whose chair was Barry Lell? The order of the speakers Barry Lell(??? 39:26). The order of the speakers was the following: Davidson, Montague, and Scott. That was the sequence. Davidson presented a, the title of the paper was a Semantics for Natural Language based on Truth, or something along those lines. Then Montague presented English as a Formal Language. And I don't remember, I mean, Dana's presentation was not about natural language, but some formal properties of some symbolic system that could be used for natural language.

So I made a huge effort, because the Olivetti now doesn't exist anymore as such, to try, but I didn't know that, and Dana confirmed that the conference was beautifully organized, and they recorded everything, and then they sent them the transcription of the recording. And that's where the starting point of their papers was. And Montague tended to be, whenever I was able to find papers that he delivered, and then the written version, they tended to be very similar. So in other words, when he presented a paper, the paper was already in his mind and including the style of presentation. But there is an important difference though, and it's in the introduction. In the introduction of the transcription, he starts a paragraph, I mean there's an entire paragraph at the beginning where he says, as he says in the paper, I find myself in the unusual situation of being, of fully agreeing with the previous speaker, Professor Davidson, about, you know, a theory of truth being important for natural language semantics. Actually, rather than a theory of truth, we should be talking about a theory of logical consequence. And this is really what we should be focusing on and what is missing from Professor Davidson's presentation. And then he goes on with his paper. I think that's a key. I think that's... 

HK:
It's certainly a key to something.

IC:
Yeah. I think there is a key. I wonder if Montague, in what he knew about the system that Davidson was developing based on what he had read before and what he had just presented could see, and given what I've heard about him and how quick he was in understanding people's ideas and going through it, could see that there is no easy way in the system that Davidson was building to give the kind of account of the notion of logical consequence that would be satisfactory for Montague's standards. And in fact, I don't think that Davidson ever addressed that issue, at least in any of the work that I know of. But for Montague, I think this is really true, because if you pay attention and you read Montague, even when he talks about truth, what he really cares is not truth, in the sense that you can relativize the notion of truth, that's what he tells us, what he shows us, his real obsession in terms of what is crucial, without which you cannot have a theory of semantics for natural languages, the fact that you're able to capture the notion of logical consequence. (Right, right.) And for him, as soon as you see a theory that is not doing that, I think that the interest towards that theory is diminishes and, actually, he considered that problematic and so that remark which was diplomatically cut off from the printed paper is there in a very clear way. I mean Montague is referential---differential towards Davidson. He respects him clearly otherwise he would have used a different tone, but that's as harsh as he can get towards somebody who just spoke before him, who was already a name, well established and well respected in a certain environment. He was at that time a professor at Stanford, where there was a bunch of his friends, so there was all this. But the choice of his words is very careful, but it's clear that he's basically saying, you're missing the crucial point. That's what he's basically saying.

HK: 0:43:09-0:47:28
And that at least two things, what you're saying, that I think are entirely right. First, that this aim that is semantics for natural language has as its first task to give a viable explication to the notion of consequence. And that that is why you want to do model theory, not just have one model, but a class of models so that you meaningfully define logical consequences as preservation of truth in all those forms. That's absolutely right. I remember him saying things to exactly that effect to me. And in his days, when Montague grammar was created, this was a much less problematic stance than it is now. Because what the models were like, that was just like predicate logic. So there was no sort of engineering aspect to that. And nowadays with all these different properties of different lexical items and stuff, the real problem is really the ontology that largely manifests itself in models. So, yeah, so as far as this is concerned, it's absolutely right. His view of what one had to do was to get a full definition of logical consequences that could check against our intuitions of which natural languages, language sentences follow from which others.

So that's one thing. The other thing is that that wasn't visible yet, I think not to I think not to him and certainly not just from this paper, the logical form of action sentences. At the time, I'm talking 68 now, and I can't say anything about this period between 68 and the moment he died. But, so Davidson really had this notion of a theory of semantics has to be a theory of truth. Not truth conditions, but truth. And that whole camp that developed in particular in Oxford, of all these young people like Evans and MacDowell, of course, on the basis of the fact that he, at the same time as Quine, spent a year in Oxford that must have been something like, I don't know, 69, 70 or so, or 70, 71. I think it's more likely it would have been 69. We can't verify that. But so the two of them had an enormous impact in Oxford because all these very smart very young people, Peacock (??? 46:15) was another one, Davies???... yeah anyway. So they felt that this ordinary language philosophy that had been practiced in Oxford, it was really a dead end, Ryle??? and Strawson and Hart.

And so they really sort of, yeah, flocked to this new perspective that was presented by Quine, but even more clearly by Davidson. And so that actually created this big gap within the community between those truth theorists and the model theorists, or sort of a substrate of Montague and ([bæmən]???, 47:09).  And so I don't know anything because that could have been only later about Montague perceiving this development in Oxford. He could just have done so. And his reaction to it, which I'm sure would have been negative, if he'd been aware of it.

IC: 0:47:29-0:48:43
Or maybe what he was reacting to, without seeing the difficulty of that approach, was reacting to the fact that, and I was able to check that, what Davidson does, as we would expect in the 1968 paper, he talks about the foundation of a theory of semantics for natural language on the notion of truth. That's what he does. And so there is nowhere any kind of hint, direct or indirect suggestion, that he cares and he has an idea about how to handle the notion of logical consequence. So for Montague, that would have been enough to look at this and say, you know, and there is no obvious way of doing it. It's not like even if it's not there, you can easily imagine how you do it. And so maybe that was what triggered the reaction of like, "Well, you know, maybe we should focus..." because that incipient, that the beginning is really saying "This is the central point and this is completely absent from the paper." It's not saying you cannot handle it, it does not say this, but it says "Maybe Professor Davidson should have focused on the notion of logical consequence, which I consider at the center of any enterprise dealing with the semantics of natural language."

HK: 0:48:43-0:48:48
So it's quite possible, of course, that you're talking about 69 now.

IC: 0:48:48-0:49:37
68. So that was fall 68 when the two of them presented together one after the other. That was fall 68. Which is like the event that you, the workshop that you were talking about. I'm not going to check all the all the information. I think it was organized Stanford in the spring right before the summer

HK:
Yeah that sounds right. Because otherwise, I mean he told me that...

IC:
You were not there anymore!

HK:
So the semester I was there.

IC:
I think that so he got a first idea what was like, of Davidson, who he was, what he was up to. And then he hears again a presentation right before his talk. And I think that feels like something that he had not planned to have. So he had not written in the paper, but it was a natural reaction to what he just heard.

HK: 0:49:38-0:51:08
Yeah, yeah. And the speculation I just wanted to express was that Davidson may in fact have presented at this talk, in particular what he was saying about these action sentences as an example of how a theory of truth for natural language had to be formulated. Moreover, if the paper he gave is like the paper that was published, there again you have no interface between the natural language with its syntax and these formulas. The only argument of Davidson is if you want to get these inferences right from "Joe buttered a piece of toast in a bathroom with a knife" to "he buttered a piece of toast", then if you want to explain that in predicate logic terms, then you have to form these long conjunctions. How do you do that? Well, by saying these sentences talk about particular events and then these different properties of these events that they are so that can just be strung together as conjunctions, and then the interest just with conjunction reduction. And I could well imagine that that would have rubbed Richard the wrong way because this is precisely his point.

IC: 0:51:08-0:54:51
The textbook, yes. How do we, you know, what's happening? How do we teach them to translate? (How do you get to this?) What's the algorithm that allows you to do that? You just rely on your intuition. And that's a failure of like, you know, I can totally see that. So it would be interesting to, well actually it's really interesting what we have because it really shows on the one hand some very strong guiding principles that he had in building his approach to natural language. On the one hand, an explicit full compositionality of the theory that he was developing, and second, the central notion of logical consequence. So these are two very important guidelines. 

And also, I believe, correct me if I'm wrong, but these are also, last night you asked me, we should talk about the intellectual import and some of the intellectual contribution. To me, these are two points that I always keep in my mind whenever I read his work that I would like to highlight for the readers, because I think there are ways of presenting them to a variety of audience and bring to the attention to the fact that from a certain point of view, he was the first one to formulate them in this way. So the fact that the notion of logical consequence is central to account for how human languages work in terms of meaning, I would say it definitely is. In the sense that, sure, like logicians would use that notion and sometimes they would also apply when they would do their own like, you know, they would bring a little chunk of natural language and say "and this entails this, and fine", but there was more because to bring the point home. It was not because they thought that that notion was really central in how you build a theory of the meaning of natural language.

And the other thing is, sure, and that also brings us to the issue of David Lewis and then Kratzer and others. Sure, you know, like Frege is the one that told us about compositionality and so on, but there is a difference between aiming at compositionality and realizing compositionality. And I think part of the tremendous appeal that Montague's idea had among various groups of people was because there was a research program there that was fully explicit. As you said, with lots of, "How do you do this? How do you do that?" But the fact that you could even ask, "How do you do the semantics of questions? How do you do the semantics of plurals? What about the semantics of mass, plural quantification?" And so adjectives is because the framework was set in such a way that it made it clear what you had to do, except that you know, you need to develop how compatible it is, what you need to change it, because it was fully explicit. And to me, this is a precious feature of a research program and also like I think somehow Montague had this I don't know how clear it was to him the idea that in that moment that was crucially needed in order to foster investigations and to further. (Absolutely.) So like it's only by doing this as explicit as you can. This is my syntax. "This is my semantics. This is my mapping. I can get a direct interpretation. I can get indirect interpretation. These are two different methodologies. In the end, they are equivalent, but you can choose. And, you know, and now let me tell you, let me get my hands dirty and show you how I go through, you know, relative clauses. How I go through predicates of various kinds." To me that's like fundamental in order to inspire, I mean to get results and to inspire.

HK: 0:54:51-0:55:25
Yeah, I completely agree. And this statement that you find in more than one paper, in my opinion there is no difference between natural languages and the formal languages, artificial languages and formal logic. I mean, in a way I can describe my own intellectual progress as one in which it becomes increasingly clear that that's not true. Nevertheless, it was the right thing to say at the time.

IC: 0:55:25-0:56:45
Because it pushed people to see how much that's true and to discover many layers of formal properties that natural language has. It's usually when you start using certain lengths that you can see how much you can see and how much you cannot see and then you decide to change the lens. But if you don't even have a pair of lens to begin with then it's just fog, and nothing is on focus. And so I fully agree like it's it's the push to to get as close as possible to a certain formal system and investigate certain formal properties that allows you to do to discover how much of the formal properties are actually found in natural language and how much is not. So in this sense, I mean, I think it's another reason why the program, I mean, one of the merits of the program, not because it told us everything, the program told us everything about natural language or necessarily gave us the only framework to work with. It was at the very beginning, first of all. So when you're at the beginning, you suggest, and then you see how far it goes. But without that, I think it would have been much harder to raise issues, to see things in a certain way, to discover things that don't work in a certain way, because you were investigating them in that way.

HK: 0:56:46-0:59:19
And this is something that these days gets me perhaps even more angry than it did in the past that so much of the work so much of the work on semantics, both in philosophy of language in the US in particular, and in linguistics, is sort of talking about particular constructions very locally, with a little bit of formalism that sort of vaguely presupposes Heim and Kratzer. And nothing is, well very rarely, I mean very often, nothing is ever worked out, not a single example. And if you don't do that, there are lots of things you just don't see. And it's become really a standard. I think in particular in philosophy, this is a more, a special case of a more general phenomenon. I've seen that. So, when I finished, there was at that time a nascent and growing awareness that logic was important to philosophy. And so departments---like I told you, I was hired! Departments and good departments sort of became aware that one should get people who knew their way about that. And there were lots of papers on any aspect of philosophy that showed and presupposed this kind of technical ability. And that's very largely disappeared.

And in philosophy of language, there are things that are sort of on my interest agenda. There seems to have been a change in some of those. There is a new generation of people in philosophy that really know their way around. But it's still a minority. And in other branches of philosophy it's actually curiously changed in where full precision is really essential. I mean, one is social choice, and another increasingly is an epistemology of this.

(Someone walks in).

IC:
Good morning, good morning. Sorry, I hope we don't disturb you with all our talk.

HK:
No, no, no. Aren't you doing exercises?

IC: 0:59:38-1:01:02
And so, what you're describing as a change, I wonder also if it was essentially Montague's concern, and maybe at a certain point more than just a concern, sadness, that he observed in his own department. Because I believe that what you're describing was also Montague's view of what a philosophy department should be. And he understood that when he first moved there, you know, he and Kalish were the young guys, the logicians, the others were the old, was the old generation. So you need to give time for these people to either retire or be able to hire new people that had the right kind of background. And then when finally the two of them acquire a certain kind of power, because Kalish in 1965 becomes chair and Montague in 1960, I think, 64, sorry, 64 they become, Kalish becomes chair and Montague becomes director of graduate studies, now you feel that it's time to shape the department in a certain way.

And then when they start going through these searches and progressively realizes that people that don't have that kind of background are hired, like when there was a search for somebody working on ethics, I think maybe it was around the time when you were finished, in 67, I believe, I think. So where Montague, there is a letter that he writes to the faculty where he makes a clear point, even to the dean, to protest the final decision. No, it was not a protest. There was a first letter where he says, you know, there are various candidates that have, like, a background in ethics and also a background in logic. Prior was the one with the one suggested. You know, he wrote this, but he's definitely somebody who knows his logic.

HK: 1:01:02-1:01:03
Sobel was another.

IC: 1:01:03-1:01:36
Sobel, exactly. And I think what he started realizing is that there was a Sobrie opposition not just from the people that he would expect opposition from but also from Kalish. And again that felt not just in that case a betrayal, like he didn't just feel betrayed by his own friend, but also betrayed on what he thought would be their common intellectual enterprise. So to bring philosophy to a different level, that would make the department a different department, and that would bring the whole enterprise, and it would form students and graduate students in a certain way.

HK: 1:01:36-1:01:47
One must, however, also say that the department had a tradition that goes back much further. After all, they hired Reichenbach. They hired...

IC: 1:01:47-1:05:25
Yeah, one thing though, I was able to talk to Hilary Putnam before he died. They were kind enough to invite me to his place because you know Hilary's wife, Anna Ruth (sic) Mathers, was a student in UCLA department and she became the first female faculty member of the philosophy department. (I didn't know that.) Yeah. And she told me this, she was very generous despite being very sick that day. I mean, she was very sick and that day, she put all her energy that she could to talk. 

HK:
She's not alive anymore?

IC:
No, she died after, like, she had a degenerative disease that progressively impaired her, like, at the time she was not able to walk anymore, she was able to speak, but she had to make an effort to articulate things. And, but, well, on the other hand, Hilary was there taking care of her, bringing her stuff. 

HK:
Oh, I see, there was, he was still alive too...

IC:
Yeah, I went to their place, and, you know, one of my heroes opens my door, the door, and says, "Please come in, Ivano". Like, I was not expecting to see him. I was like, "What do I do?" I feel like a panno in front of me. And it was very nice, and the wife was already there, so we introduced each other, and all the entire time, he was there behind her, let her talk, bring in some water sometimes, the things that she needed. And then at a certain point it was her that encouraged him to talk, like turning her head and, you know. Because we were talking about the UCLA department. And that's when she said, "Well, this was my time when Richard was there too," because, so she became a professor I believe so Richard was January 1955 she became a professor in 1957. And and so she said 

HK:
Was Hillary still the student at that time?

IC:
No, they met later. (Ah, I see.) And so when we were talking about, "Oh, what's your impression?" Because Hillary left UCLA in 1952 and Reichenbach died in 1953. So Anna had just arrived. So when Hillary left, Anna arrived as a student. She finished and they hired her as a lecturer first and then they gave her the tenure track position, the first woman to do so. And she said "I was the only woman and there was this tradition on Friday afternoon for faculty to go to a bar for a drink, but a single woman to a bar in LA those days was not a thing that was good for your reputation. And so I knew Richard well, he knew me well, and I knew that he was gay, and He said 'why don't we go there as a couple?' So we solved the problem! And I very much appreciated that because he allowed me to, and you know..." So he had lots of other anecdotes of that kind. So when I said, "Look, what about UCLA Philosophy Department before Richard arrived, because you were there." She turned towards Hillary and asked Hillary to talk. And so what Hillary told me is that his only reason to go to UCLA was 1948 when he went as a graduate student was because of Reichenbach. He says, "I wanted to study with Reichenbach, but I knew that everybody else, and when I went there, I got the confirmation, I was not at that level." So the UCLA department that is with the presence of a lot, like, you know, the Carnap department, the Montague department, or the Kaplan department. That was later. But at that time Reichenbach was the only figure that I could interact with about that. It was a very heavy, like on the one hand historical approach to philosophy, and then some of the American pragmatism but that was the UCLA philosophy...

HK: 1:05:25-1:06:24
Yeah, okay, there was this tradition Moody(??? 1:05:33) was an example of that I guess. But I mean they hired Russell in the 40s, for a year.

IC:
Bertrand Russell? (Yeah.) At UCLA?

HK:
I can't remember exactly when it was. It was after Russell left Britain.

IC:
Well, he had an appointment in New York. Then it does poorly because of the...

HK:
Yeah, it was at that time, yeah (crosstalk) I don't know the details actually. He was there, I mean, yeah, because he was… did he actually emigrate because he refused to...? There was no longer the draft saying like in the First World War. I can't remember exactly why he left Britain at that time.

IC: 1:06:24-1:07:18
From what I remember, there were a couple of issues that he had. One was his pacifist stance. And the second, there was that issue related to the school that he created with, I think, the person that was at that time his wife or his partner. (His second wife, yeah.) And the kind of pedagogical approaches that they had. (I see.) And, you know, we were coming from the Victorian time. (Yeah, yeah, yeah.) And the Edwardian time was no much better. And there was a complete violation of one of the crucial, like, codes of England, which is you educate the youth, the important youth, in a certain way. (Yeah, yeah.) And I think there were some scandals involved. 
HK:
The separation of girls and boys was not there!

IC:
Yes, exactly, which was not separation. And then I think somebody came in with the scandalous things, "oh, they are naked together", something like that. So it was a major scandal. (So that made him the...) At least from what I read from the biography, it sounds like.

HK: 1:07:18-1:07:52
He was apparently financially very badly off at the time. After having given away everything he had at an earlier stage. And so apparently this book, The History of Western Philosophy, was also something he took on because he needed the money. 

IC:
Oh yeah, that's something like that.

HK:
Anyway, I thought he was there also. Somebody must have hired him. And also, I mean, this was all from my time, but not all this, not all that much, Abraham Robertson (Oh, yes. Yeah. Yeah.) was in the philosophy department, or half-half.

IC: 1:07:52-1:08:19
I think it was a half-half. And I think the driving force for what I understood was mathematics. (Could well be.) Yeah. And what they managed, I think, what they managed to do is they piggyback on mathematics to say "let's give him a joint appointment." (Still, I mean, they didn't...) No, no, that happened when there was already, I mean, I think it was the time when Montague and Kalish were still interacting and acting as a unit.

HK: 1:08:19-1:08:20
Oh yeah, sure they did.

IC: 1:08:20-1:08:27
Yeah, because it was in the first half of the 60s, I think, or the mid 60s, like, no, I think it was in the first half of the... Then he left. 

HK:
Robertson was already gone when I...

IC:
Yeah, because he left relatively soon.

HK: 1:08:27-1:09:56
And he left because, in fact, he was sort of persecuted by Montague. And C.C. Chang, I think, or whatever, who thought that this was all far too imprecise, what Robinson was doing. So actually that, so Robinson then went to Yale. And so what I heard, I mean actually, Montague told me personally, he thought that it was just all too fluffy. And so he, when I think it was in his very early years, I don't know exactly when this all played out. So Robinson, I think, as you say, left the early 60s, like 61 or 62. And according to Montague, it was because because he couldn't stand these young guys. 

IC:
Well I can imagine that style.

HK:
The relentlessness of those two people I can well imagine. He felt his life was made possible by a blessing. To what extent that was important. No, I mean, in those days---yeah, I think even now---going from pretty much anywhere to the mathematics department in Yale would be felt as a promotion.

IC: 1:09:56-1:11:22
And so talking about this kind of presence, maybe if you don't mind, I would like to go to the second big area of our discussion today.  Like, oyu know, academics that come and go. Something that would be very important for various reasons, and if you're interested, I may be able to explain that a little, but first I want to hear what you know directly and indirectly about David Lewis' presence at UCLA, and in particular, his interaction. Definitely at the intellectual level, if you know anything also about the personal interaction with Montague. And you can easily imagine why this is important for the intellectual point of view. We have two bright minds that around the same time work on similar issues, and at the same time I think it's also, given the position, some of the opinions that have been expressed by people in the field recently about reconstructing the history, and a very strong attempt to completely downplay Montague's role by basically saying of all that what he said, either it was already present in work by Church and others, or it was actually seen and presented in a much better way in work by David Lewis, I think this issue become even more important. And what I'm referring to are some recent take by Angelika Kratzer on how...

HK: 1:11:22-1:14:39
Yeah, I mean that's completely wrong. Yeah. And, I mean, not only that it ludicrously underplays the role that Montague played, but also, I mean, as far as David Lewis is concerned, you can actually see it in the work. I mean, compare Convention with general semantics. These are two different worlds. I mean, they're both important worlds and he's rightly held in great esteem for each of them. But general semantics is what he wrote and could only have written after he came to UCLA. And I mean, it wasn't recorded. So I saw him, I actually knew both him and [Steffi ???, 1:12:28] quite well. And Steffi actually, I helped some of her logic prelims. And I... 

IC:
It's true because she was a graduate student at the time when they moved to there.

HK:
Yeah. And they came together. 

IC:
Yeah, yeah, yeah. She was a student.

HK:
So Steffi I actually knew quite, not closely, it's too much. But, and so, and I knew David also, he's not that easy to get along with. So then the year---I mentioned that---the year from 70, 71, when I was in Amsterdam, I quite often stayed with him. On one occasion I remember him saying about Convention, it's a silly book. And I didn't pursue that. I mean, actually I read only part of it. I knew what the line was. My reconstruction, I should have perhaps asked them, why do you say that? I didn't feel, although not competent enough to do so. But my reconstruction was that there is nothing about the compositional aspects of language in there. And that you could do Montague Grammar in the way that Montague did, I think was absolutely central to his development. And I don't know how much emphasis he himself has put that in talking to other people because after all his line in the end is quite different and the qualities of general semantics precisely where it goes beyond the details of Montague Grammar is also very important. And then that became his own world, but now much more in the spirit of doing the kind of thing that Montague did. Something that, well, he might have discovered all this on his own, being as smart as he is, but in fact it was his presence at UCLA at the time, and his participating in seminars that Montague gave and so forth, that historically is very clearly the source of this.

IC: 1:14:39-1:18:00
I mean, in my interaction with Angelika, I asked her if she had a copy of David's dissertation. Because Convention, the book, is heavily based on the dissertation. (Yeah, it is. It's really sort of, yeah.) But crucially, not the last chapter. If you compare, what you notice is the foll---so the last chapter in the book is where he starts elaborating on natural language. (Yeah, yeah.) He starts getting some ideas. Now notice that when he writes, because I went to check the timing, I went to check in his archive, so that, the book came out in 1968, and that chapter was the last one to be written, between the end of 67 and, no, the end of 67. So he had already been one year at UCLA talking to Montague and attending his courses. And you start seeing that while the last chapter of the dissertation was about natural language, but in a way, first of all, way smaller. We're talking about like, I think it was less than 10 pages to begin with. And while in the book it's 30 pages.

But crucially, it's the approach. So the last chapter feels like Quine forcing him to say something about natural language that quotes Quine. In fact it's all Quine! (I see.) "Quine, in Quine blah blah in Quine 1960, like the claim" So, and it's the Quine style. So you take some expression from natural language, you elaborate a little bit. It really feels, with respect to the rest of the book, there's nothing coming from Lewis. He was forced to put it there. There's nothing new, nothing original, nothing inspired.

Two years later, when now the book, that's turned into a book, now you start feeling like, "Okay, clearly, first of all, he has changed his frame to talk about natural language, and he clearly is elaborating some ideas." That's not Quine anymore. And then general semantics can perceive almost like the continuation of that, now that it has, on the one hand, all the pictures very clear in mind, the tools developed. In the meantime, for example, generalized quantifiers were introduced by Montague and crucially not played a role in the framework that Lewis develops as well and so on. So based on this evidence, I don't see how you can deny, and the fact that we know we have witnesses like Barbara that, you know, David was attending Lewis' (sic) courses, when very likely the two of them were talking to each other. You know, like Montague wrote letters about Lewis. He was very well aware of who Lewis was and what he was doing. There was all that discussion when Lewis got the offer from Princeton of like, what do we do with Lewis? "He was an assistant professor, and Princeton offered him tenure", and so there was discussion within the department, "Do we offer him like associate professor with tenure or do we go for full professor?" And so there was a discussion based on the level of the work and, you know, Montague, his position was "we offer him associate professor with tenure because that's what he has done so far." And so, you know, it's not somebody like "I don't know who this guy is" and clearly they know each other. And then Stephanie, when I interviewed her, she confirmed that, you know, they knew each other. They were interacting quite a bit. And so, and it sounds like you can confirm that, that, you know, clearly there was a strong interaction between the two.

HK: 1:18:00-1:19:15
Yeah, I know. So Barbara's testimony is from later than mine. So I saw Barbara only once during the entire time I was at UCLA. That was at a logic colloquium in spring of 68 where she had been invited in to talk. It was about negation. I can't remember the details. And I knew that this person existed in the linguistics department. I had a really big reputation very early on. But I'd never seen... I hadn't read any of her stuff. I mean, it wasn't the sort of thing I would have read at that point of the book Chomskyan syntax. And I had never seen her. And I didn't see her again that remaining time it was there, it was only at this famous summer school of the ASL in Amherst where she sat in on a course that I gave.

IC: 1:19:15-1:19:31
1973, is that correct? Yeah. Because they just celebrated the 50th anniversary with the New Orleans Saints. And there's these beautiful pictures of many of you guys on a meadow, like being there hanging out and you know.

HK: 1:19:31-1:20:30
It was a lovely time and it was very productive also. But, yeah, so our mutual knowledge, knowing each other exactly from that. And then we actually saw each other quite often because, for one thing, we were for many, many years, we were always invited as speakers to this, what's now the Amsterdam Colloquium, in that time it was still called the Montague Colloquium. Yeah. And then eventually I got the job at UMass, where we overlapped at least for a little while. Anyways, so my knowledge of Lewis at UCLA sort of went from when he came until I left which was...

IC: 1:20:30-1:20:37
Two years later. He came in 1966. He came in 66, and you left in summer of 68.

HK: 1:20:37-1:22:13
67, 78, 68, right. And then actually after that, through this meeting, living with somebody or staying with somebody, it was only a few days each time, still, it made a big difference. So that he and Montague knew each other very well and that there was a mutual appreciation, I had not all that sort of hands-on evidence for, but it was clearly the case nevertheless. I understood them as both concerned actually with very much the same project even though [General Semantics MS, ???, 1:21:36] the one paper that I remember from that time, is about language, is different in a sort of general tenor nevertheless it's about [closed conditions of sentences, ???, 1:21:48] in natural languages. And Lewis, this is something I learned much later from Barbara, of course one of these things she has written now about the history of, early history of semantics, that actually David Hewitt knew a lot about syntax even before he came to UCLA. That's something I didn't know, and it sort of went back even to the time when they were both, I think they were even at the equally old, but they were both at Swarthmore.

IC: 1:22:13-1:24:19
Yes, and that's where they met. And then for graduate school, I believe David was one year younger than Barbara. (That sounds right.) and they were both extremely precocious and so then they moved, maybe with one year difference, they both moved to Cambridge, I mean one to Harvard any other MIT, but she was telling me that David was coming to Chomsky's lectures and that's probably the where his knowledge of Generative Grammar... and then they were very clos, they were talking. They shared his interest. And so probably by the time he comes to...

Also, that's the other reason why, when Angelika cites from a letter that Lewis, I believe this is a letter that Lewis wrote to Barbara, where he complains about Montague bothering him with understanding what Chomsky is saying. I don't know if it was Aspects or something, and you know "I keep telling him or I don't know how to explain this to him", you need to be very careful because these are private letters written by one friend to another. And you can easily go into that modality of emphasis, caricature, that is fine when you're writing privately between among friends, that doesn't necessarily mirror the reality. The fact that Montague wouldn't be able to understand Transformational Grammar, it sounds to me like makes no sense. Maybe what he said, you know, maybe Montague was complaining that this did not make sense. That's a different story. But, you know, I'm expecting somebody like Lewis to be able to make those distinctions so from there you cannot build the conclusion "Oh see, Montague didn't even know generative grammar while in generative semantics we already have the use, and that's why his syntax is so poor and so miserable versus Lewis that uses, has much more knowledge about syntax." Like uh...what are we trying to do here? So that's, I find, very, like, poor, let's say, that historical reconstruction that misses the crucial points of what, first of all, what is relevant and what is the background of the people that are involved.

HK: 1:24:19-1:24:37
I mean, as far as this thesis of Angelika (unintelligible). I was actually pretty annoyed when I heard about it. I mean, being as she and I know each other well enough, she knows enough about me. She also knows that I'm one of the few people who are actually there. She never even bothered to contact me about it!

IC: 1:24:38-1:24:47
Wow! I mean, because clearly you'd be one of the few people to be able to say, "look, that's not how it went."

HK: 1:24:47-1:25:25
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I don't, yeah, so I was very annoyed, but we have not had time since. And I can remember when I once asked a question to a, not from person to person, I haven't seen her for quite a while now, but I think I may have asked a question. There was a meeting of Sinn und Bedeutung in London.

IC: 1:25:25-1:25:33
Yes, the online one you mean. (Sorry?) Are you talking about the one online? Because she gave an interview online to celebrate, I think, what kind of anniversary? So you're talking about an anniversary?

HK: 1:25:33-1:25:35
50 years of Sinn und Bedeutung.

IC: 1:25:35-1:25:41
Yes, but where she gave some kind of interview on the history of semantics online? Or you're talking about an event in person?

HK: 1:25:41-1:25:57
The occasions I think of were they had for that meeting of the Sinn und Bedeutung in London. I think it was, I can't remember, it was either UCL or King's College.

IC: 1:25:57-1:26:01
Because she was on sabbatical there, yes, she was visiting.

HK: 1:26:01-1:26:27
Yeah, that actually, this was all on Zoom. (Yeah, yeah yeah) So they invited four people. So I was the first, Barbara was the second, Martin Stokhof was the third and she was the fourth. And I think on that occasion this came up again and but nothing got resolved.

IC: 1:26:27-1:26:37
One thing that I feel will be, because she sent me that material, and also she sent me and Barbara at the same time that material.

HK: 1:26:37-1:26:39
Before she actually came out with it?

IC: 1:26:39-1:26:53
Yeah, so well, right after she gave the presentation at the David Lewis conference, because that material was first presented at the conference that was organized in England to celebrate, sorry I don't remember which anniversary related to David Lewis, probably was…

HK: 1:26:53-1:26:57
Oh yeah, that is a different occasion from what I'm talking about.

IC: 1:26:57-1:28:54
Yeah, yeah, no, no, I know that. And I think that was, yeah, it was 2021, I believe, the 20th anniversary of David Lewis's death. So there are two different occasions. That was before the Sinn und Bedeutung occasion you were talking about, and there was the first time she presented, and in a talk...there was a recording, so I saw both the recordings when she was leaving, then she shared the slides that she used, and that's where she made the strongest of her positions. Just to give you an idea, we're talking about basically saying first of all it was David Lewis that came up with the idea of generalized quantifiers and that's the evidence. Second, Montague, intentionalities, indices, this was already in---and natural languagebeing basically not different from symbolic language---this is already in Alonso Church's paper in 1937. And there is a quote, okay? Then I went to check the paper. It's completely misleading, because what Church was suggesting is that there can be formal properties, but many people have observed that some formal properties of artificial languages may be found in natural language. But that's a very different position from saying that you can [account to begin with..., ???, 1:28:10]. And the indices he talks about are something completely different. And that made me very suspicious. And not just that, but the talk was really a demolishing attack towards, not just Montague, but also the tradition that came out of Montague, in particular Barbara. It was a personal attack towards Barbara. 

HK:
 How strange. Very strange.

IC:
 I mean, almost like a never-ending necessity to kill somebody that she'd already killed decades ago. I mean, Barbara was completely removed in terms of power from the department. You know, the dynamics within the department once Angelika took over were indisputable. I mean, so why do you need to do this? I would understand if it was the opposite side doing that as a later revenge, but Barbara would never do anything like that. It's not in her nature to begin with. Why... So...

HK: 1:28:55-1:29:00
That is an aspect, I actually don't even perceive the whole thing.

IC: 1:29:00-1:30:54
So after that, I felt, first of all, very bad for Barbara. And then as somebody who's trying to reconstruct as in a story like... This is not faithful to the facts and that's when I asked "Angelika have you ever seen David Lewis' dissertation? Not the book, the dissertation because I do have it if you want I can share with you" and in my reply I say "Look Angelika, these are the facts, this is when Montague is developing these ideas, these are the seminars, this---we know these are facts. Look, this is the card in Montague's archive that shows that those two, they're like David Lewis attending the seminar, Barbara Partee attending the seminar. This is 1967. Okay?

And so this is when you're... So this is the seminar that would produce English as a Formal Language. So it was fall 19... (69 it must have been.) No, no, sorry, fall 1968. Martin was working on the presentation of English as a Formal Language. He would give the presentation at the end of October in Milan. The seminar started in like September. (That's what I was saying. And so they were going...) That paper was already pretty much... The paper already existed. Yeah, the paper already existed. And he was presenting this to them. But also, there is evidence that David Lewis was attending previous seminars by Montague because in the previous year, in fall 1967, Montague offered a seminar, I think, that was under the label of mathematical logic, or something like that. But crucially, if you look at the content of the seminar, he was doing exactly what he wanted to do, that is, apply logic to a variety of philosophical issues. And, number one, for the first time, he uses the label of mathematical linguistics. Okay? Mathematical linguistics. And second, advertising the linguistics department. And what does he want to discuss among various things? Word and Object and Aspects and that's a seminar will use presents in particularly presents on counterfactuals because they discuss.

HK: 1:30:54-1:32:27
So that's a seminar that I was... 

IC:
Oh, you were there in this! Okay, okay.

HK:
...and my recollection of it is somewhat different from what you just say. I think it was called Pragmatics. And there were a number of different people presenting. What I presented there was this account of dates in tense logic as operators. So as an extension of Prior in tense logic. And Lewis presented there for the first time his theory of counterfactuals. Howard Sobel presented his theory of counterfactuals, which is a little different, but has very close ties to David's and I can't remember whether they, I think they were aware of that beforehand.

Now those are the three presentations that I remember but the, so it took the form of different people presenting stuff and Montague himself must also have presented something about, for him Pragmatics at that time was---Pragmatics of Natural Language---was just I and you, and I think I may also have presented something out from now as a tense operator okay I don't know more, but it doesn't quite fit the description that you just gave.

IC: 1:32:27-1:33:17
What I have is the following. You know that I reconstructed the entire teaching on Montague and his colleagues. So I have the table in front of me. So that year, in fall 1967, he offers, well, the usual PHIL 31, which is the logic first course, but at the graduate level he teaches 260, which is the Seminar of Mathematical Philosophy. And it was on Tuesday from 3 to 6. So from the syllabus that I have, it looks more like, that's a note that I wrote to myself, it looks more like a Philosophy of Language seminar. There is a discussion with Lewis on conditionals. At least that's something. He kept some of the material that was presented there. And in winter, so right after, almost as if it's the second part, he also teaches...

HK: 1:33:17-1:33:18
That's the time that we have quarters already.

IC: 1:33:19-1:34:28
Yes, that's the time with quarters. That's the year with quarters. I think this is, let's see, it's the first year or the second year. It's the second year. They change it up in 66-67 and in 67-68 is the second year when you had quarters. Right after, in winter 1968, he teaches again, LING 260, Mathematical Philosophy. There seems to be a follow-up, like a continuation of the course. And that's the course in which what is presented is something that, you know, by the Montague style, students have to take notes. And then if we would check the notes, and then the one that were approved would circulate. And my understanding is that every week there will be a different person doing that. So in those notes that he kept, taken by somebody who had a beautiful, beautiful semi-Gothic handwriting, you see the appearance of what is called Professor Montague's Grammar. That's where you present the English as a Formal Language system. So you have the [adjukeivɪtʃ, ???, 1:34:26, could it be "Kalish?"] category of grammar, you have the system of the syntax, and you start getting the semantics and the list of construction that he wants to deal with. So I wonder if…

HK: 1:34:28-1:34:42
I don't have any recollection of it, but I'm sure I must have been there. I mean, this was a paper that I knew quite well already at that point.

IC: 1:34:42-1:35:23
So you were, like according to my records, because I also tried to look at what the people near Montague were doing based on the teaching. So according to my records, they are not complete, but you were teaching a course in spring 1968, so the following. When Montague was not teaching, you were teaching, I have you down actually for two courses, is it possible you were teaching two different things? So one is PHIL 32, which I think was the second step of logic, and you also were down for 133 Logic, which was the third in the semester. Is that possible?

HK: 1:35:23-1:36:06
Yeah, I didn't remember these two, but I do remember having, in the same semester, but I do remember having taught from the Kalish and Montague's book. And this 133, that was much more sort of meta-theory. That was the one that was also used to prepare graduate students for the logic part of the prelims. I think that's where I also had Steffi Lewis. So that course I do remember, and there was one I remember too, I didn't know though, in the same semester. I was paid as a lecturer that last semester.

IC: 1:36:06-1:37:59
Oh, okay, okay, last quarter. Now I understand because, and probably as a lecturer they may, if the records are correct, remember, the records, what happens is I had access to what I think they are the official records, that is they would publish these books with all the courses printed out with the instructors, but of course they had to be published months ahead and then you have to make corrections. So I was then in the, UCLA kept the official archive. I guess there was an office that was centralized that would take care of all the teaching and when there were changes to the teaching you would have to inform that office. UCLA kept those with the handwritten changes. And that's where I said,because what they were doing they would first of all change the name. Sometimes the name of the instructors would be changed or would be added because it was not available before. And the other thing that they would add by hand would be the number of students enrolled. So that's why I know, sometimes, for example, I know that in the seminar, at least officially enrolled. So in the seminar in the 260, the mathematical philosophy in the fall 1967, there were 14 students that were officially enrolled. And in the one in the winter, there were 12 students that were officially enrolled. So I did this because, well first of all it's always good to have an idea of like, was Montague teaching at all? Was Montague free? But also, what was he teaching? Because teaching, especially at the graduate level, the variation that you see in the last few years are very telling. Because they tell you about a growing interest that he had. So up to the seminar in 1969, I believe, at a certain point, he was supposed to teach a seminar on recursive function and just one month before replace it on one graduate level, on one on philosophy of language. (So, originally it was recursion and it became...) And he replaced it. And he presents universal grammar. So, and then the following quarter he continues again and he's already working on PTQ.

So you can see that there is something that was going on. And that goes back to an important point that I think you raised last night and made me think a lot. It's like, what role was natural language playing in his enterprise? Was it just an extens---"just"---an important extension of the goals of philosophy using the new tools that philosophy had? Or was that maybe something more? And, you know, of course, there can only be speculations. My feeling is that, also based on how Montague had followed intellectual passions earlier, I was not able to find an area of intellectual passion for which, like a theme, for which he became so interested intensively, both in terms of producing work and teaching, over a significant amount of years. So from the moment things are adumbrated, 1966, let's say that, you know, we're talking about winter 1966, it's a crescendo. And clearly something is capturing them. It's not just, "okay, I have one more area where I can apply my tools that I'm developing, so let me continue, I apply here", which is a little bit what he had done before.

HK: 1:39:31-1:39:57
You know, this famous quote from Montague, something that Barbara found in one of these documents that she went through in the archive, where in the margin of some paper. She didn't know which paper it was. He says, "oh yeah, and then there's the application of this" it was about higher-order intentional logic "to natural language. That should be easy."

IC: 1:39:57-1:40:11
Yes, yes, I remember, yeah! That was one of the initial ones. Similarly to when he, I think when he was working on English as a Formal Language. He makes a list of all the quantifiers he wants to deal with. You find a note.

HK: 1:40:11-1:40:19
So when the work went on, on the formal language, he already had noted it wasn't quite that easy.

IC: 1:40:19-1:44:25
Yeah, but notice that even when in the preliminary work, we need to be able to handle, like I think he has definitely has "every" he has "some," he has something like "many," "most" and so on and then he says "Well, we should keep plurals away for now." So clearly there was something in his mind, I think, that was deeply intrigued uh by what at the beginning maybe he thought as a relatively simple extension, "Okay one more area I can apply my tool to", the deeper he went into it the more he discovered that it was. Like, on the one hand I think he discovered there was a lot more to do and to understand but I also have the feeling that somehow he discovered that there was an area of investigation that was relatively new, interesting, and people were interested in it. Because he had a group of people around him that showed interest. He had people asking for like the manuscript, you know, "I saw your presentation, can you please send me this?" And these were people outside the usual range of people that would contact him.

And, you know, I think with Montague, it's not just Montague, but we're talking about Montague, I think it's never possible to fully distinguish, like to separate the dimension of like, "I'm doing this because there is a very precise intellectual appealing and that's it." And there is this because "I feel that I'm creating a new path. And that's something exciting. That's something pleasant." And I think there was something very important in Montague's identity that had to do with receiving the recognition that he deserved. I think it's there constantly. It's as if, like, he has to be sure that there is official recognition of his value and if there is not, that's threatening, that's upsetting, that's irritating. And you know I don't want to go into cheap psychology. I don't care the origins but I can see the pattern.

And that's also why, you know, like it was so important, remember when, you know, when Kalish made the terrible mistake, mistake, it was not a mistake, I think it was intentional, to send his file... 

HK:
 Went off the rails to put it that way.

IC:
Yeah, to send, you know, that was the last, I think, bad thing, really bad thing that he did. Basically, he sent...Richard applied for the Step 4 promotion. You remember that UC has all these steps when you become a full professor. So Montague was already full professor Step 2 and he was applying for---sorry, Step 3. He was applying for an acceleration to go to Step 5 due to the publication and so on. So the file had to be submitted, and basically Ka-, the chair submitted, Kalish submitted an incomplete. So, the part that....

HK:
So that's something they never followed up on...?

IC:
No, the Chair didn't include the letter that the Chair had to include! So CAP, the Committee on Academic Promotion, sent the file back to say "This file cannot be submitted as such because it's incomplete. We are missing the material from the chair." And that's when Montague lost it completely. And what he... (This was when?) So it was spring 1969 when he applied. Spring 1969, summer 1969. What Montague did, I don't know, probably he also yelled at Kalish, I don't know, but what he did, what I saw that he did, he let the rumors circulate, not just the rumors, he said, "I want to leave. I want to leave UCLA. Do you have an offer for me?"

So within a couple of months, he got five offers. And one of the fanciest ones was from Rutgers. They were offering him more than a 50% increase in his salary, a secretary, and so on. And so what Montague did, he got the full matching from UCLA. So first of all, now he jumped not from Step 3 to Step 5, he jumped from Step 3 to Step Six, which also required external letters and so on and so forth.

HK: 1:44:25-1:44:27
So this did go through?

IC: 1:44:27-1:45:12
Yeah, yeah. That was his revenge. So when he said, "Aha, now we apply: I want this file prepared in this----", essentially he became from a normal internal promotion, he became retention because he had these five letters with these five offers. So they went, bypassed the Chair completely, he went to CAP, and CAP to decide "are we gonna match it or not?" And they matched..

So that's how Montague got a half-time secretary. Unfortunately he was not able to enjoy much because it was already I think uh winter or spring of 1970 so just a few months before he died. And he got like the highest salary in the department, roughly at the same level as Alonzo Church. So all this to say that...

HK: 1:45:12-1:45:15
There are only seven steps as far as I know.

IC: 1:45:15-1:46:00
So the way it works now, I don't know at that time I did a check, so Step 5 is the last compulsory one, in other words---mandatory one. That is, as a full professor, you need to go up to Step 5 with the kind of rules that you have and you need to get there by showing that you have productivity. From Step 5 on is optional. So Step 6 is the one that requires still letters as if a new tenure, but that's optional and you can do whatever you want. And then I think, yes, you have Step 7, seven I believe? And then after that it's what they call, how they call it? Not of step, there is another term not of scale, not of step. There is a and you know which is the Outstanding qualification

HK: 1:46:00-1:46:16
I am asking because I actually never quite knew what degree of excellence I was supposed to address myself. For Ed Keenan, I wrote twice a letter and they were both sort of beyond what people normally can reach.

IC: 1:46:16-1:49:48
So one probably was Step Six, which is not mandatory, and the other one is for this Outstanding Excellence, I don't know if it's like university professor or something like that. Then again it's something that is completely optional and depends on the level for which you need, crucially external, letters.

So I think that it was for Montague, I don't know, maybe I'm biased. I'm biased because of course I'm a linguist and the work that Montague that inspired me was the linguistic work. But I mean I tried to be as objective as possible using the technique of, like: Let me compare what he has worked on over time. How has he worked on those topics? How much of that was in the classes he was teaching? For how long did he go on developing that topic? And so I'm completely ignoring the after, because Montague couldn't know about the after, you know, like how many people would follow and would develop that. But just within the time he was alive, first of all, definitely Montague must have felt that there was a time there was a lot of attention towards natural language and how you should investigate natural language and new ways of doing that.

This was a conversation that was going on at Berkeley, at Stanford, at UCLA. So there was, in particular, this idea that those tools that were developing of intentional logic had something to say also about natural language. That was clearly around. And my impression is that he may have felt that he had found a way to turn that general interest of desire into something that was a true research project with the level of precision that is demanded by a project like that, and in general by philosophical enterprise. I think that's what potentially found fascinating.

It's true, as Chomsky said, well, but in any case it was not proving any theorem. But the point was not to prove a theorem. At least, I don't know if he, maybe he discovered that something exciting is not just, you know, proving a theorem is always important if you come from a certain kind of background. But there what he found was really a potentially fascinating, challenging, difficult implementation of a research program that is to use higher-order logic, to understand the world, to understand matters of human knowledge, intellectual knowledge. And here it is, human language.

And then notice: "important", "easy". And then, not that easy. You remember in in the in the textbook, the introduction to the textbook, says "even if possible, it wouldn't be an enterprise of interest for the authors." Three years later "Oh, now it's interesting. Now it becomes a major challenge, or an interesting challenge."

And so that's the way I'm trying to address the question that you raised this like, "What is the role that natural language was having in Montague at that time?" Of course, I, you know, we cannot make any prediction about how for how long he would have gone like that but in that moment, I think, of his intellectual life...Just think about the fact that he, among the books that he had in his mind. Like I found the list, like the books that he was working on, five projects. The only real new one, together with the one that was almost completed on recursive function, that my understanding, I know nothing about recursive functions, I asked people that know a little bit more to take a look. And there was nothing... This is the one that he developed with Perry Smith.

HK: 1:49:48-1:49:51
Yeah, yeah. Recursion theory as a branch of model theory.

IC: 1:49:51-1:50:06
Yeah, exactly, exactly. So I'm not able to judge that. But crucially, he put that project aside. I mean, in the last few years, he was not working much.

HK: 1:50:07-1:54:43
I don't know that there would have been much more to say. I mean, the point he was making was that Recursion Theory could be understood as a branch, part, of the theory of syntactic forms of definition. So this is the mathematical hierarchy, where you've got these formulas to define sets of numbers that can be... So the lowest class recursive, for recursive functions or recursive sets is...Those are the sets that can define by an arithmetical formula with just one existential quantifier in front of it, and at the same time also by such a formula with a universal quantifier in front of it. And then, so that actually gives you this hierarchy that starts with the...

Okay, starts syntactically speaking with these propositional formulas built from arithmetical predication. Like what's y is z, and whatever you might still add by way of arithmetical reading is. But basically plus and times, that was one of Gödel's great achievements that you could actually do all this stuff of coding with just one time. And then the hierarchy is produced by ever more complicated quantifier alternations and prefix.

And then to show that the various definitions of recursive functions in...What comes closest to this is this definition by Gödel in terms of equations and Turing's definition in terms of Turing computability and Church's notion in terms of lambda definability, which actually comes quite close to this idea that these are all just, like, completeness theorems, basically.

And then the idea was, well, I mean, this is the special case of natural numbers, but we can generalize this to arbitrary languages with a propositional core and then quantifiers. And with a propositional core, there's various things about what the atomic formulas are that you can assume there. But so in that sense recursive function theory can be considered as a special case of this more general notion of general recursion, where it is the same story of this hierarchy combined with specific assumptions then about the verifiability or computational verification of the atomic formulas of these languages of which the language of arithmetic is just one. (I see.) And so that was the basic idea.

Perhaps one could have gone further by working out more about these computational verifiability conditions of these atomic synthesis of these different predicates of these different languages. But I don't think there is much in the manuscript. And maybe you're right in saying that he lost interest also in the sense that he was no longer motivated in exploring that option much further.

IC: 1:54:43-1:55:30
Well, you know, he had a book contract and three out of the four chapters were written (Yeah yeah.) And so and the book contract and the three chapters based on the other what I found in his archive were ready by either the end of 68 at the beginning of 69. (Yeah yeah.) So Montague died two years later though. So in two years it's as as if that was not a priority. And crucially, it was a project probably, due to the personality of Perry Smith, that he would never be able to handle by himself. In fact, there is this correspondence two or three years after Montague's death where the publisher said, "Well, only one chapter is missing. Do you think you can do it?" Perry says, "Well, I'm thinking about it, I'm working on it." Never, nothing ever happened.

HK: 1:55:30-1:55:33
Was it actually going to be a joint authorship?

IC: 1:55:33-1:56:15
Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, it was a joint authorship. Yeah. 

HK:
Is it available in any form?

IC:
I can share it with you in the sense that it's what I found in the Montague archive.( I see.) So he had like the end would, not just what I found in the Montague archive, which was partially that, and then what Perry gave me. I don't know if I mentioned I was able to meet with Perry. (Yeah, yeah.) Although it was a difficult interaction. But you know there were alternational moments and in in those moments where he was more present, even before we met, he had found lots of things that were irrelevant but one thing that was particularly relevant which was that manuscript.

HK: 1:56:15-1:56:40
I think I must have had it. Maybe there's a big chest next to it. I keep some historical...
 
 IC:
You mean the manuscripts?
 
 HK:
I have one in Montague's own longhand. I don't know if there's a copy. (Yeah, yeah.) It's probably the same.

IC: 1:56:40-1:57:07
Well, I'm happy to share the one that I have. I've digitized everything, so I have it in electronic format. I can send it to you, and if you ever have the chance to find it, you can tell me if there is any crucial difference. But the one that I have is actually typed and ready. So clearly, it was already sent to, like, I mean, we are at a level of---and that's probably why the publisher writes, like, "Well, we have three, we're missing the last chapter", but I think the project was out of four chapters, and that chapter was never written.

HK: 1:57:07-1:57:11
And do you have any idea what was planned to be in there?

IC: 1:57:12-1:57:51
No. I can go back and check my notes. Nothing pops up in my mind which may be, but I cannot exclude, for example, that the manuscript had some kind of table of contents where maybe the title of the chapter was indicated. I need to go back for that. I don't have that visual memory now. But what I know is that there is no... that chapter does not... I have not found that chapter. Perry... the material that Perry gave me does not contain anything and the letters that I found in the Montague archive are clearly talking about a missing chapter, the last one that is needed in order to be completed.

HK: 1:57:51-1:58:25
So it's interesting because at the time when Montague was engaged in this, I don't know whether I went back much before I got there, but it was certainly in the first two years it was one of the things that he was actively enthusiastic about. 

IC:
Yeah, you see, that's exactly what I'm talking about.

HK:
And there was a, that sort of also stimulated the whole thing, I think. There was a real, yeah, I think one could say competition between him, as far as this was concerned, and Moscovakis. Oh yeah, oh yeah. I interviewed him. Oh yeah, okay. say competition between him, as far as this was concerned, and [Moscovakis???].

IC: 1:58:25-1:58:36
Oh yeah, I interviewed him. He's a very sweet guy, very diplomatic, but I think I got a sense of what was going on in those years.

HK: 1:58:36-1:58:49
So Yanis, I thought, was thinking it was completely trivial, what Moscovakis was doing. And the real problem was, I guess, his more general notion of an algorithm. I...

IC: 1:58:49-1:59:36
Yeah, no, I mean, I think from the interview that I was in a few years ago, he very diplomatically told me that it was hard for him to see, you know, the relevance that, you know, in order to advance what has already been produced...the relevance of that kind of line of investigation. But my impression is that, whatever the reasons are, is that either because he realized that it was less urgent or maybe he lost some of the interest, or maybe just because he got more passionate about other things. And so, remember, I was telling you there is this list of books that he's working on that probably was compiled just a few months before he died. So we're talking about when he was working on PTQ, so fall 1970.

HK: 1:59:36-1:59:38
So what were the other books on that list?

IC: 1:59:38-2:01:46
One was the Feferman book, of course. So that's why I say the only new project is the one that I, let me get the slide so I can remember. So for sure it's the Fefermann project---the book with Fefermann, the book with Scott and Tarski...

HK:
They were still on the list.

IC:
They were on the list, oh yeah. The list, they don't... I told you because the book actually, that was something that, although slowly, they kept working. In fact by the time Montague died...I'm just looking for the slides so I can share that you can see what he wrote because that's...

And so that book, the book with Scott and Tarski, was something that was still moving, unlike the one with Fefermann. I think the one with Fefermann was not going anywhere, and he had already... Let's see the slides with... No, this one I think was earlier, sorry. These are the Partier Workshop, that's the teaching, where do I have the slides with the book he was working on? Okay, so I can show you at least this, this is the English as a Formal Language, and that's what he said in person, you know, "I found myself in the unprecedented state of almost complete agreement with the preceding speaker, Davidson. Like Professor Davidson, I reject the contention that there is a basic theoretic difference between artificial and natural languages. Like him, I also regard the construction of a theory of truth as the basic goal of serious linguistics. I should say not exactly a theory of truth, but rather a theory of the more general notion of truth under an arbitrary interpretation. It is this more general notion that is required to analyze the notion of logical consequence. And indeed, the notion of logical consequence itself was, I think, required in Professor Davidson's discussion, particularly blah blah blah.

HK: 2:01:46-2:03:56
There was one more thing that I wanted to say in response to what you were saying about this, and that is that in a way what Davidson does in that paper, I mean he provides these predicate logic formulas. I mean, the model theory for predicate logic we already had, even before Montague started doing his thing. So as far as getting a definition of logical consequence for those formulas that Davidson proposes, that could not have been a problem.

The only way in which I can see a real difference between that proposal of Davidson and what Montague was doing is, and now I'm repeating myself, is that in Davidson, he just posits these formulas without telling you anything about how you get there. But once you get to these formulas, then the question of logical consequence has already been sorted out. So I have a feeling that one aspect of what moved Montague to say this in this bit that you just showed me was that that's not really a semantics for natural language for the sentences that, in particular, that Davidson gives as a starting point for the analysis. And that this question whether you can use something like Davidson was proposing as sort of an example or a first entry into the more general question of the theory of truth for natural language as opposed to the theory of logical consequence for natural language. I would have liked to see… I don't know. Have you seen the transcript of Davidson's...?

IC: 2:03:56-2:06:57
Unfortunately, let me double check because I had to request the copies. I may check in my archive. I may have only part of it. What I do remember though. So if I remember that, it must be the case that, it must be the case that I've seen the Davidson paper, because something that comes to my mind now that you say that is that: look how different what Davidson said at the conference is from what he wrote. (I see.) And while here, you know, I have the entire presentation, oral presentation, the transcription of what Montague said is almost, like, he uses the same expression. He literally took from the transcription, which means it was written in that way. So that's what I remember.

So since I have this memory, it must be the case that... And I can check. I'll check in the archive and I'll let you know. I'm kind of frustrated because I was... I do have the slides, and sometimes in your mind they organize..., with the list of the five manuscripts. So I do have four of them in my mind and I was telling you that it's the one with Tarski and Scott, the one with Feferman, the one with Perry Smith, and there was a fourth one that now I can't remember, but the one that clearly was the most recent one added to the list and the one where there were remarks about "I want to add this" was the one on natural language. Okay, let me... I need to have that slide because now it's frustrating. Where he says... Here it is. Okay, yeah. It's under... "Because I want to present that in 1971," there was no evidence that he wanted to die. That was not the point of this slide, okay? So, this is the axiomatic... an axiomatic approach to set theory. That's the Scott and Tarski. Then higher order logic and abstract recursion theory with Perry Smith by North Holland, written three out of four chapters before Montague's death. Then this was the one with Feferman, that Feferman had given up with. And then the Analysis of Language, or Logical Analysis and Ordinary Language, or Language and Meaning, he alternates between these. And in some of the notes he says, you know, "the three papers" because that's written when he already had PTQ in mind so there will be the three. And then he had two more that wanted to add, a five chapter book.

And then this was a more like, you kno, you call you collect your philosophical paper so this was not supposed, the last volume was not supposed to have new material but it was a way to present what he defines as his more philosophical papers into unit. And this was then I think what inspired... so this book, the contract that he had for this book, was with the publisher that then later published Formal Philosophy. Because what Kaplan told me is that the publisher got in touch with him, with Kaplan, and say, "What can we do now? Are you willing to publish some of the material, maybe combine the two projects" 

HK:
It's Yale University Press?

IC:
Yeah yeah Yale University Press, and and well there's a story that Kaplan told me. And Kaplan said "I didn't feel that I could do it, it was too close to Richard's death."

HK: 2:06:58-2:07:03
That's interesting because I always thought that it was Yale University Press because Rich Thomason...

IC: 2:07:04-2:07:18
No, no. It's the other way around. Yeah, so Montague already had a contract with them for the Analysis of Language. And so it was Kaplan that suggested Thomason as somebody that could work on that.

HK: 2:07:18-2:07:27
That I knew, but was the suggestion also because he had some, Thomason had already had some kind of contact with Yale and Rupert?

IC: 2:07:27-2:07:35
No, I think the suggestion only came from Kaplan because I think they asked, "OK, you're not willing to work on it, who would you suggest that he's able to do that? "Yeah, that was definitely...

HK: 2:07:35-2:07:38
So Thomason was or had recently been at Yale?

IC: 2:07:38-2:08:24
Yeah, no, no, the contract already existed. They wanted to publish something that now wouldn't be by Montague directly anymore but a collection of his work. What I need to double check, I don't remember if the collection of the more philosophical paper was with Yale University Press as well. And so when he died, they may have decided to combine the two projects. Because the collection is a collection not just of the linguistic papers, but clearly the papers that are more philosophically and linguistically inclined. And so maybe they combined that. I need to see if there is any evidence. I could also ask Thomason if he remembers that there was this, how the project was presented to him. Because, you know, crucially this project was built out of five chapters and two of them would be new.

HK: 2:08:24-2:08:30
I think that at that time Thomson had already moved to Pittsburgh.

IC: 2:08:30-2:09:50
Yeah, he was not at Yale anymore. And I do remember because Montague wrote letters for his hire. So there is a copy of the letter, which is actually an interesting letter because those days was very, I think it was not uncommon to ask to rank people that are available in the market. And although these days I think people are more cautious in doing that. So there was a direct comparison. And in that letter, which was written in 1970, I think, yeah, I think in 1970, which I got there in the end of 69, probably early 70. He compares... They were, they asked, they were looking for a logician, okay? Somebody with a strong formal training in logic. And so his recommendation number one was Thomason. His recommendation number two was...recommendation. They were asking probably from the way, the tone of the letter, I think they may have sent a list of people and they were asking his opinion for these people that they were considering. I guess it was a common practice at that time, at least not uncommon. People said, we are considering these candidates. Can you tell us your opinion about these candidates? And he would say that, well, you know, as a logician, you should hire Thomason. David Lewis is brilliant, but does not have the same kind of formal background that Thomason has.

HK: 2:09:50-2:09:51
True.

IC: 2:09:51-2:12:25
True. I mean, of course, you know, we can read a lot of things in letters, there's indirect inferences, but the statement, I think it's true. I mean, it's fair to say. So that's the, and to me, the reason why I was mentioning this fact is that, again, at the end of his life, the thing that he's more actively engaged with, the thing that clearly requires new things that has not been produced yet, is the work, the analysis of natural language or formal treatment of ordinary language, for which he wants to write two more chapters, two more papers. So whatever it was, it was something that was very alive in his mind, very active, triggering excitement, interest, desire of making that as public and as important as a book. Because my understanding is that a book, academically has a weight, as a role. It fixes like, "look, there is this corpus of work that I have done that has some kind of... (Consistency.) consistency to it, yeah. That gives a vision of something. (Yeah.) If it's just a side project, you don't care about publishing a book out of it. And so, at least that's what I can conclude about Montague, you know, early, you know, fall 1970, early 1971. I also wonder, because, you know, there is little left of Mont-, I mean, in terms of information, what was going on with Montague in general, his life in that period. The only... Dana has always been very reserved, with a few exceptions, but once he felt like sharing this memory that he had of Montague, just, I think, a few weeks before he died. I don't remember where they saw each other. Maybe it was at Berkeley. I went for something at Berkeley. Yeah, because Dana and I were walking on a street like, "Oh, Richard and I were here. I remember we were walking on this street. And I remember this remark that he made about, you see, I'm losing my hair. I'm getting old". And he said there was a sadness. Again, this was surprising because normally Dana doesn't make remarks of this kind, but it was probably one of those emotional moments where he says "It's strange because there was a kind of sadness that normally Richard wouldn't have. He would always be very kind of playful and, you know, ironic or something like that. But he was serious, and he felt like, you know, remember this, like, look like look okay I'm losing
my hair I'm getting old so

HK: 2:12:25-2:12:34
It can be sort of half playfully said and yet (Yeah.) this...

IC: 2:12:34-2:15:32
Also with somebody that is very was very...

HK:
Doses of sadness, yeah.

IC:
And and and I wonder you know it could also be that in that moment, you know, I think academic work has always been a source of both recognition and excitement and energy for Montague. Definitely, it was the part of him that he felt could totally control. And, like, I know what's going on. I know how to handle it. I know how to proceed from one step to another. There was a very different kind of excitement in the sense that it's a totally controlled excitement, which is a form of empowering. 

And, of course, you know, the other dimension of his life was as we know more problematic. He had essentially the world, you know he was getting old it's true he was 40, but I mean but the world around him like they were, like his parents, they were they were falling apart. Like the father that was not mobile anymore, the mother was clearly losing some of the energy that she had, the falling apart of his relationship with Bob. My understanding is that it was Bob that at a certain point said, "That's it, I move out." And the arrangement that they found saw that Bob, I think, purchased, a kind of symbolic price probably, the house where they lived together and that's where he moved. The first one, the one in Beverly Glen.

HK:
The one in the canyon.

IC:
Yeah. And that's where he lived until he died. Although clearly they stayed in touch, clearly they were interacting with each other, probably that happened around 1967 or 68 I think when that kind of more official split happened. And that's when Montague started getting like students that would at least be roommates so that he wouldn't be alone in that house and I was able to contact a couple of them. One was actually...

HK:
The one who was there during the night where...

IC:
Well the one that was left one week before oh actually a few days before and was interviewed by the police.

HK:
I see

IC:
I think I share this with you that was like I just happened because... 

HK:
There was nobody there at the time, was there?

IC:
Well, actually, so the way... My understanding is the following: That Montague, when he had [Westerdahl???, 2:14:58] as a roommate, he also had a student. So there were at least three bedrooms in that house. (Yeah, yeah.) And so there was a student that was there like a, UCLA graduate student that I was able to talk to. He was Greek, and I was able to get in touch with him because I saw, that's the good thing of having an unusual name. It sounded like a Greek name. I did a search at UCLA around those years, and said, "This could be possible. Is this person still active? Yes, he has a LinkedIn account. Let me try. Is it by any chance the case that you were at UCLA?" And he was like, "What? How do you know that?" And so I had to explain it because he knew because...

HK: 2:15:32-2:15:36
It was his car that they took, isn't it?

IC: 2:15:36-2:16:49
No, no. So Westerdahl car. So Westerdahl was same age as Montague, was an architect, he was white, and probably the two of them were friends. So they knew each other. I mean, I think I told you that the night Montague was, tell me if I'm repeating myself, okay? So the night that Montague was murdered, the two of them went together to Montague's parents' place to celebrate his father, Montague's father's birthday. And he was, I checked, he was Montague's father. So these men, they just celebrated his birthday, because it was a Saturday, March the 6th, 1971. So what Westerdahl tells the police, and the reason why I have access to the, remember the case is unsolved, so in theory I tried, but with the Freedom of Information Act you don't go anywhere because when a case is unsolved, you don't have the right to access the material. (I see.) And so I was lucky enough that the detective that reopened the case in the cold case unit understood what I was doing and was willing to share things that legally you are not allowed to share.

HK: 2:16:49-2:16:55
I see. Not even somebody in public. (No. No.) So... Was that because he had been called officially as a witness?

IC: 2:16:55-2:24:19
No, no, no, no. It s just because, like, the rule is that if the case has not been solved, all the information that concerns the case cannot be publicly released because you don't know if, of course we know that nothing is going to handle this case, but the law is not made in the... Right, to prove...

HK:
 if that information becomes relevant, then it couldn't be used in court anymore.

IC:
Yes, exactly. And so basically he said, "Ivano, I think I need to go to the bathroom", leaving everything open and giving me the kind of look. And so and then he commented to by the way so it's not it was not just me, and so he commented on the fact that he, you know, what Westerdahl said. So I have the recording, he let me record his voice so this is not just my memory. And so what he read Westerdahl told the police, and what Westerdahl told the police, so it's not even he the the policeman telling the story, he was reading from what Westerdahl told the police. Makes not much sense.

Essentially the story says: "We went, Montague asked me if I wanted to go to a dinner with his parents because it was his father's birthday and the father couldn't go out anymore." And that's all true. "So then we go with my car because Montague says that his car has been having problems with ignitions and so on. So we use my car, we go there, we have dinner, we come back home, it's around 10pm. At that point Montague asked me if I want to go out with him. And I said 'No, I feel kind of tired, I don't want to go out.' And so he asked if he can borrow my car because of the ignition problem. And I said 'Sure, no problem, in case of emergency I have my job car.'" So he had two cars available. "So Montague takes my car, goes out around 10:30, and then I change my mind and I decide to go out as well. I came back at 2 p.m. (sic) and Montague is not back because I don't see my car. So I go to sleep around 2:30. Around a quarter to six, six, I was woken up by the sound of this guy going down the stairs, almost like slamming the door of the fridge, then opening the door. And I, you know, I was, it was still dark." It's March, so at that time, still dark. "So I opened my window to check what's happening. And I see two or three black guys jumping in my car and driving away. I call the police", and we have the first call "to say my car was stolen.

"A few minutes later, he says, you know, I went to check then for my roommate, for Montague, and I see his body there." So he calls the police again to say, send an ambulance. It's possible that Montague was still breathing, although his brain probably was already gone. But the ambulance arrived. Notice that before he calls the ambulance, he calls Bob. Well, at least Bob manages to get there before the ambulance comes. (I see.) And then the ambulance comes. It could also be, you know, Bob was living much closer than the ambulance. (Yeah, yeah.) He had to drive up and so, but notice that, so Westerdahl, John, I think was his name, calls Bob right away.


HK:
So I see, yes, yes, I see.

IC:
So Bob arrives very, very quickly so that he manages to arrive even before the ambulance comes. That's at least what is written in the police report. When the ambulance arrives, they find Westerdahl and Bob there, and the body. So that's the people... one week uh actually maybe even less than one week, five, four or five days later--earlier, sorry the student the graduate student who was a roommate decided to leave the house abruptly and did not have the chance to talk to him. He said, "I want to talk to Montague in person about this, but he was never at home. I tried to leave a message, and then, you know, I hear that he has been murdered." Because at least that's what he told me. It's like, "I had been there, I think, since January, but something was not working. In particular, often there were parties, and one night a guy came inside my room. And I didn't feel comfortable. My girlfriend at that time told me, just came and move with me and that's what I did. I wanted to tell Montague about it, but he was never at home. When I was at home." So, and said the police... 

HK:
So this is a plain contradiction.

IC:
So, as far as the Western Doll is concerned, yes, the story is full of contradictions. First of all, because... 

HK:
But the boy is the one that you were able to contact.

IC:
Yeah, Westerdahl died in 1985. I see. So, and the only thing that I know, because I was able to get in touch with some of his nieces and nephews, is you know they remember the uncle they remember that he was living with a black man and that he was into black guys and, but he never told them about anything about having a roommate that was murdered and so on.

I was able to find the partner that he was with, not when... Not at the time, he did not have a partner, (He is now...) so Westerdahl at the time when Montague was murdered in 1971, as far as I know, I was able to reconstruct did not have a stable partner. So both of them were single men (I see.) and single gay white men (Yeah.)

A few years later the nephews and nieces remember this, like "In the mid-70s I do remember that he had a partner because we would have, you know, he would bring the partner, we'd go to their place and it was a black guy a little bit younger than my uncle." They remember the name and I was able and said, and he was a musician. 

HK:
This is the nephew of this Westerdahl?

IC:
Of Westerdahl, yes. I remember the name and and I remember there was a jazz player, a piano player, a jazz piano player in LA. And so I was able to find him except that you know I tried to do different addresses it was before the pandemic because it was in his at that time must have been in his early 80s he never replied, and I didn't get the letters back so it means that the address exists somehow but he never replied.

So the reason why this was important for me is because for a certain point I mean I like to be able to establish the truth, as close as possible to the truth, I agree with you that this story that the roommate, Westerdahl, told the police is not very, makes not much sense because like, first of all why do you tell the police that you were kind of like roommates, but you don't know him very well when you then you say that he took you to his parents place for the birthday? I mean this is a very personal thing to begin with. Second you let him use your car, not for an emergency but for clearly going out.

I think honestly by putting all the pieces together I think what happened there is that the two of them were good friends and probably they would go out together to the places where you could cruise, and that's what they did that night. And that's why it was Westerdahl's car that was used and that's why the guys took Westerdahl's car because that's the car that they was used to pick them up. So when you're leaving you take the same car, you know that it's there, you know you can drive it. So probably they came back and now I don't know if it was you know maybe they went to separate rooms it doesn doesn't matter, but I mean, Westerdahl knew...

HK: 2:24:19-2:24:29
Westerdahl was there all the time, you think, from the moment that Richard came back with these people.

IC: 2:24:29-2:25:27
Yeah, yeah. And, you know, because probably they picked them up together. They were there together. (Yeah, yeah, that's what he did.) Yeah, yeah. And, but now, I understand. Now, put yourself in 1971 with the kind of attitude there was towards homosexuality. Now you are in a situation in which the roommate, your friend, has been murdered probably because of some erotic game. Two or three, maybe young military guys, black guys, were involved that you picked up like that. You are a white gay architect. You want to come out as a gay man involved in a murder because there was some sexual thing going on? I mean, your life is destroyed. And the police, I mean, the detective told me he was very honest. Looking at what they did, what they wrote, I think, you know, I agree with you, the story is very suspicious, but, you know, clearly they decided to close the case because those cases were not investigated.

HK: 2:25:27-2:25:32
What would have been the benefit of finding out?

IC: 2:25:32-2:26:11
And also, he told me, it was kind of explicit, at that time these cases were not relevant cases. And he said initially, because it's here in the report, two teams of investigators were sent. Because when they heard Beverly Hills, UCLA professor, murder, that's going to be a big case. They started interviewing people. They talked to Bob. They realized this was a gay guy and probably brought some young guy that he was paid to have sex with. UCLA, the parents were probably destroyed and not willing to push anything.

HK: 2:26:11-2:26:45
That's what David Kaplan told me about it. He said the police were very sensitive in the way they handled this. And apparently also, I mean, he was the one that sort of represented the employer that's in the department. And he told me that they said, "Well, Professor Kaplan, we could continue this and we might find something, but let us also think of his parents." But more or less...

IC: 2:26:46-2:26:58
I don't know if there was a, like, you know, there are many things you can tell the parents. Is it really true that your parents, it's better for parents not to know that, I don't know, I mean, to me it smells a little bit like an excuse of, like...

HK: 2:26:58-2:27:44
No, I did, well, that's certainly not the message I got from what David told me. It was more like, I mean I knew that Richard was gay and of course and that can't that can't not... I mean I knew Bob and so forth, oh you've told me. But it was not that bad. So they may very well have drawn the inference from the little I heard that most people had been. But it's still a different thing whether that becomes a public thing in the media and all that. Then neighbors who ask them, "Do you know?" That's much much wore.

IC: 2:27:44-2:29:18
It was that aspect. And so, in the end, you know, there was not much of an investigation. And I mentioned that to you, like, the parents arranged the funeral, which was in a modest funeral home in the San Fernando Valley. There was a group from the department, they went to the funeral. At that time the department chair was Montgomery Firth. So Firth read a one-page speech. Some of the material then went into the obituary that was written for the UC obituary system, the one that was written by Firth, Church and , and there's a third name. Yeah, it was Kaplan. (Not Kaplan?) Yeah, maybe it was Kaplan. So Church, Kaplan and Firth, not Kalish. And another interesting thing is that the department never organized anything to remember Montague. And just the destiny decided to create a striking contrast because two months later, so this is March, in June, so three months later, a professor in the UCLA Philosophy Department, his name was, I think, Arnold Kaufman, died because the airplane he was on fell somewhere.

HK: 2:29:18-2:29:22
He was half in philosophy and half in law.

IC: 2:29:22-2:30:20
Yeah. In August, in the middle of the summer, the philosophy department and the law department organized a significant event to celebrate the figure with people speaking and with people talking. In the middle of the summer, for Kauffman. Now, all the respect, it should be done for every member. 

HK:
He was very highly regarded (Yeah yeah) it's completely right. But the contrast is amazing.

IC:
Yeah, I mean, nothing, nothing of any kind. So I think there was on the one hand there was of course a shock and, you know, there was also a shock when somebody dies because the airplane falls. I mean, that's not expected. (Yeah.) But there was also, I think, also embarrassment surrounding this death. And probably, I cannot exclude, at some subconscious level, for some people, it was like a relief. I cannot exclude it. Because I think the atmosphere in that department at that point was really heavy.

HK: 2:30:20-2:30:29
Well it was certainly during the three years I was there...

IC: 2:30:29-2:31:03
And it only got worse remember like less than one year earlier there was all that tremendous thing that Kalish did and then Montague getting the five offers. Now you can imagine because I mean I've been in academia enough you too so, you know, imagine all the people in that department all the senior people that all of the sudden you know, imagine all the people in that department, all the senior people, that all of the sudden, you know, we go from Montague not getting his promotion from Step 3 to Step 5, to Montague skyrocketing to Step 6 with a salary that is the highest in the department. And Montague was only 39 when he got this. What do you think, you know, the reaction was there?

HK: 2:31:03-2:31:04
"Is he really that good?"

IC: 2:31:04-2:31:17
Yeah, yeah. Exactly, exactly. Yeah, yeah. Like, oh, as usual, you know, he gets what he wants. Now it's going to be even more annoying. How can we, you know, maybe it was our chance to let him go somewhere. Yeah.

HK: 2:31:17-2:31:49
Yeah, but what is also amazing is that the department, if this is to be in fact true, never really did something to compensate for that, say by having some big thing or something five years after his death or ten years after his death.

IC: 2:31:49-2:32:56
I mean Kaplan asked me if I was willing to work on something, maybe on the occasion the book would be out.
And I felt like, "David, first of all, I don't know when the book will be ready. I cannot promise anything because clearly this cannot be the central..." At that stage, I think it was right after my tenure, like, sure, now I can at least work on the book, but, you know, I don't have the resources to make this the only, I have students, I have to keep publishing, so I... and there was still a lot of work to do in the research at that time. And the other thing is, I try very politely to say "Well, maybe, David, maybe we should find, you know, find out, yeah, some, some, somewhere else, you know, also. Another place. Is it really fair that...

Also I don't know what kind of support there is to this. Because you know you need resources you need participation. It would be nice that after all these years I was hoping you know maybe in the 50th anniversary yeah but, but then other things happened. And it would also be a way to later recognize that still this figure is one of the most important ones that you ever had in your department.

HK: 2:32:56-2:33:27
One thing is whether one should try and do something or should have tried earlier, quite independently of what he was, simply because it was important and then the question is who would do it and what should happen. But there is also a special, well, "duty" is perhaps a strong word, but a special reason that his departments might have for coming clean on this, so to speak.

IC: 2:33:27-2:34:25
I agree. I agree. No, no, I agree. But, you know, David was looking for somebody who would take the initiative and I was very honest with him. "David, I do not have the resources because I don't have the money and the power to do it and I'm not in the UCLA department." (Yeah. Right, right.) "So So I'm happy to participate." And so when Walter Dean contacted me, I said, you know, "Walter, I'm willing to consider this, but keep in mind that if you want to do it, you need funding. And if you want to do it in the U.S., in California, it must be substantial funding. It's not that easy to organize a symposium without a significant amount of funding. And honestly, I don't have the kind of network that allows me to have access to that money because the only thing I apply to are research grants. And that would be a different kind of grant. So you would need somebody like Kaplan that is able to talk to the right people at UCLA to get that kind of resources."

HK: 2:34:25-2:34:32
But the department has got the money. That's not right. They've got 20 million from Kaplan's son!

IC: 2:34:32-2:34:46
Yeah, I know, I know. I know. 

HK:
I mean, if they wanted to.

IC:
I know, believe me. I know, I know. And I was hoping, like, David, maybe ask your son to put a condition, like, on half a million of that money that has to be used.

HK: 2:34:47-2:34:50
A hundred thousand would have been plenty for such a need.

IC: 2:34:50-2:35:20
Yeah, I mean, you know, but no, I was hoping, no, sorry, what I was thinking, I was hoping that he would ask... create some sort of like fellowship for graduate students for Montague's name, which would be a way relatively simple... So you could do like it's an endowed scholarship for graduate students working on a certain area of philosophy, for example, and it's the Richard Montague Scholarship Fund. That would have been a simple way, no more money needed, to basically remember.

HK: 2:35:20-2:35:40
Yeah, that also sort of points to a different kind of, what's the word, a sort of competitive tension between those two. It's very different from all the other.

IC: 2:35:40-2:37:34
Oh yeah, oh yeah. No, no, I know, especially like, I can imagine, you know, a young brilliant student and then faculty member concerned about the shadow, being in the shadow of, like, you know... They work very good. (Yeah.) You remember, you must know the story, from the very beginning there was both mutual interest but also tension from the choice that Kaplan made to have Carnap as his official supervisor on his thesis. Kaplan was very explicit of it: "There was no doubt that I would be the last student, Kaplan's, sorry, Carnap's last student. I wanted that and I made it clear. I mean it is true that most of my work was with Montague." 

HK:
Yeah that's both of them.

IC:
So he was honest. He said, "but I could not, and I told Richard, Richard, it has to be Carnap." And so I think in the end they found a way to go over that. In fact, they collaborated a lot right after. They wrote a paper. They had, their NSF grant starts when Kaplan becomes a professor in 1964 and goes on at least until he gets progressed every time renewed or extended and modified I think until 1969. And that's when they Montague then apply on his own for a project where natural language plays, and semantics plays an important role. Up to then was development of high order logic. So they always, they shared the grant, which meant at that time, probably meant the possibility of travel money, inviting people, maybe supporting students. (Some salary.) Yeah, some salary, summer salary for example. So in that sense they kept collaborating and tracking but of course I can imagine for somebody like Kaplan there was also the issue of making clear that, you know, "I'm not just his assistant, you know, there's also me with my own ideas." 

HK:
You're just a student.

IC:
Yeah, yeah, the students for example.

HK: 2:37:34-2:37:48
So apparently when Richard first came to UCLA, it was very short notice to replace Reichenbach, so David was still an undergrad, but he wasn't that course.

IC: 2:37:49-2:38:27
Yeah, and actually, you must have heard this story from David, is it correct? Yeah, I reconstructed. Memory can do that. I think I reconstructed both what happened and both what David's memory did. So, you know, David has a very, and I understand, I mean, look, I wish I could have been Carnap's student, okay? I mean, it would have been such a tremendous intellectual experience. And also my understanding is that Carnap was a very gentle person, kind of like reserved, but gentle and available and intelligent.

HK: 2:38:27-2:38:30
A [təɹmɪn???] professor in the best sense of the word.

IC: 2:38:30-2:39:04
Exactly you're right. Perfect. So I can imagine somebody that is looking, a young brilliant student that is looking for inspiration and here it is, the very famous professor that is also understandable, that is actually really interested in sharing knowledge. So because the actual story, that I have the document that shows that, is that Reichenbach died in 1963. (Sorry?) Reichenbach died in 1963 while he was teaching. Yeah. Okay? And David was taking the class. (Yeah.) But actually Montague, sorry, sorry, in 1950... 

HK: 2:39:04-2:39:13
Fifty-three.

IC: 2:39:13-2:40:47
Montague was hired in January 1955.

HK:
No, no, but that...

IC:
No, no, he, he, what David remembers is that Montague was asked to come to... (To replace Reich...) To replace... No! (That's not true!) No, it never happened! (Ah!) You know what happened instead? So that's why, remember I don't think he's lying. What happened is the following. Montague arrived January 1955. David told me that he met him right away because Kalish had organized, "oh, today Richard is coming, you guys are coming all together, we are taking him to the coffee place, he's a genius, blah, blah, blah blah" and so he remembers that very vividly but since I do know, David shared his class records from UCLA, so I know all the courses he took when he took them and I have the one that Montague taught so and then I have the class notes the the lecture notes. So Kaplan was in the class that Montague was teaching on the semantics, let's always call it semantics, that normally would be the class that Carnap would be teaching, with the notes that Carnap prepared. And now you see in the lecture notes at a certain point Montague asks a student to prove the theorem, and you know in the lecture notes says blah blah blah cannot prove the theorem. Professor Montague says a student to prove the theorem and you know in the lecture notes says "the blah blah cannot prove the theorem professor Montague says it's not the student's fault there is a problem in the proof" this is a some 

HK:
This is stuff of Carnap's not of Reichenbach.

IC:
Carnap. So david's david's memory is shifted, I think to protect, somehow, Carnap, is shifted to Reichenbach, but it's actually Carnap.

HK: 2:40:49-2:40:52
I've been living under this total misconception.

IC: 2:40:52-2:41:54
And I went to, because I said, well, maybe, how do I know? Maybe Montague was called all of a sudden in 1953 to teach just for a few months. No, the records clearly show that he was a teaching assistant in a class at Berkeley. So it's impossible that he would come to UCLA. I mean he was hired and plus he was working as the choir director. There was no way for him to move to Los Angeles. There are plenty of evidence that he was there at Berkeley, he had just got his MA. Actually he got the MA that summer, 1953. He was working as a choir director. He was working as a teaching assistant. Feferman remembers him. (Being there with him.) Yeah, sure, because that was the time when also Dana Scott had arrived. So there was that time of overlapping. Because Dana arrived in 1952. Sorry, yeah, 1952. Yes, Montague was 1948, Dana 1952. So yes they were both in the class with Tarski. So there was I really you know...

HK: 2:41:54-2:42:14
That was actually an extraordinary trick of memory I must say (Well...) I mean the story that I can still remember sitting, and it was just when I was at UCLA in either 1997 or 1999, I was twice there then, and sitting in the car with David and telling me that story.

IC: 2:42:14-2:42:59
I heard the recording of David saying exactly that story, which for me was like, "Wow, that's, you know, let me go and check, you know, now it's possible." And I said, "Okay, hold on." First of all, there's no evidence that Monta, you could have been for that time. You teach a class, you have to be there at least a few weeks. And so how do you do that? And then when I was going through all the lecture notes, January, I was interested, like, what did Montague teach as soon as he arrived there? And he taught the semantics. And then if you see, it's exactly what David told me in the story. There was a proof, a student went to the blackboard, but then he couldn't, and everybody was like, "oh my God, now what's going to happen?" And Montague, very mildly said, "No, no, you're right, there's a problem there. So your assignment for next time is going to be figuring out how you should do the proof." 

HK:
So that part is the same.

IC:
Yes, exactly.

HK: 2:42:59-2:44:10
But David actually told me it was quite explicitly. So Reichenbach was teaching this stuff on probability that he was working on. It came out as this book about probability. It is indeed lots of theorems with little proofs. And that is, so Richard took over in the middle of the semester having to continue teaching that book and the first time he, instead of writing, appeared in front of his students: "So what have you been doing?" and they were saying "We're doing these proofs" and then Montague was signed, I think is the way David told the story to me, was that Montague was signed and as an exercise for the next class proving the theorem. There weren't so many much knowing overall that there was no proof. So on the one hand the stories are very similar but on the other hand, it was so specific, with so much aplomb. I mean, these details about that particular text, which was kind but not...

IC: 2:44:10-2:44:53
I mean, of course, I cannot exclude, like, of course, I was not there, and we have somebody who was there that has this very vivid memory, except there are lots of things that don't fit the picture, in the sense that, you know, like, Montague was overbooked at that time, was also about to file his MA thesis with Tarski. So, and, you know, I have the memory of Feferman, who was the TA in the class that Montague and Dana were taking that semester at Berkeley.

So, there's, and, of course, I cannot, the other crucial thing is that in Montague's, Montague's work was very meticulous in material. He kept everything extremely organized. The archive, the current archive is organized according to his criteria. Yes, yes. How is it possible that there is no material of that class? Yes, material about all the other courses. I mean, you are called all of a sudden to... Sure, one could say, I can see David could make the point, "Well, you know, he was not a professor at UCLA yet. He came, they gave him some material, he had, like, you know, he did not have an office where he could keep the staff, so even if he had something, he'd be brought back to Berkeley and then stayed in Berkeley." That's impossible, okay? I cannot exclude that. But, you know, this is not an insignificant thing.

HK: 2:45:26-2:45:41
You know? It was an extraordinary, I mean, the way it was presented was an extraordinary distinction that they would get this graduate student from Berkeley to replace somebody as famous as Reichenbach. So, if it was true, it should be my, there would be something in the...

IC: 2:45:41-2:46:55
Montague had brought to UCLA, because the famous box that I told you, the one that was not destroyed by the archivist, I thought it was personal stuff, in that box, he had the lecture notes that he took when he was going to the college in Stockton, because he graduated at 17. From 17 to 18 he went to the private side of this college that was otherwise a community college and he went with a degree in journalism. So he took a course about writing, he took a course about politics, ethics, something like that. He kept those notes. There was one about poetry. He kept the notes, some of the material, some of the assignments. So he brought those things to Berkeley first and then to UCLA in his office.

How is it possible that you run into a problematic passage of such a famous philosopher and you don't keep the lecture notes? I don't know I mean of course everything is possible. I cannot---you know, it's possible that Montague would drive I don't know Friday afternoon to teach the lecture. I cannot exclude that. And then drive back to. But especially there's so many similarities. Like, it's possible that this is...

HK: 2:46:55-2:47:01
I mean, driving back and forth, I mean, given the distance. I mean, that you should actually have come once a week to teach the lecture...

IC: 2:47:02-2:47:31
And then drive back. I mean, okay, if you do it over a weekend, and maybe you're with your friends, so you don't drive alone. But I mean, it's a substantial drive from Berklee, and more so those days. 

HK:
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it takes a little bit.

IC:
Plus, you know, normally the weekend and part of the week would be, and the evenings would be taken by the choir. At that point, he was directing a significant, he had a good job. Okay. So that's the, but again, that's not so crucial, so I don't want... But in the book...

HK: 2:47:31-2:47:37
I've talked about this anecdote to many people, so I hope I'll still have a chance to correct this.

IC: 2:47:37-2:47:54
Well, I mean, the book is going to contain the anecdote for which I have evidence of, which is the one about Karnap. (Yeah, yeah.) Because I do have the lecture notes and Professor Montague says that it's in the lecture notes.

HK: 2:47:54-2:48:01
But then, I mean, this hire in '55, so he was hired more or less at the same time as Carnap.

IC: 2:48:01-2:48:08
Carnap was hired at the beginning of the academic year, so 1954. So that's when Carnap arrived.

HK: 2:48:08-2:48:13
I see. So, Richard was hired not as a replacement of Reichenbach...

IC: 2:48:13-2:49:32
No, absolutely not. He's hired as... And I don't know if this was discussed with Carnap when he was hired, as part of a trend that maybe Kalish was trying to establish, to create, somehow to borrow the Berkeley model and make UCLA similar. So you have philosophers with a strong logical background that would look at philosophical issues with this kind of perspective. So Carnap was his way to say, we lost Reichenbach, or their way, probably was not just the young Kalish, he was just an assistant professor at that time. So it was his way to say, their way to say, "Look, we want to continue that tradition. We lost Reichenbach, we get Carnap."

And probably, I don't know if it was part of the discussion of the full package, I'm sure that Carnap must have said, you know, at least consider the fact, do I really want to teach those large intro courses at my age? I mean, I don't know. And in fact, if you look at the teaching schedule, he never taught those intro courses. He taught other upper division courses with few students or, in fact, I do have the schedule there together. That was very useful to see what Montague was teaching, and Montague was teaching what then later became their textbook. So they created, because when Montague arrived, I believe there was only one Intro to Logic. And then he and Kalish created the two layers, and then later on they were going to create the sequence of three logic courses.

HK: 2:49:33-2:49:34
I mean, I was there, it was five.

IC: 2:49:35-2:51:17
Oh, really? Okay, okay. But I think that what they created, they created a system in which all their majors, undergraduate majors, have to take two. Earlier on, I think there was only one that was required. If then you want to major in a certain area of philosophy, you have to take three. So you have to take the Logic 133, I believe it was one number, and it was on top of the other. Or 30, it was like 31 and 32. And then you have to take another one. And then they create the sequence for graduate students as well. Now, Carnap, I think, was involved with the graduate students, but they tried to shield them from the... In fact, in the early year, Montague taught some Intro to Philosophy, and then he taught Philosophy of Science, and then he taught the Intro to Logic. So I think that was part of that package. Like, "Well, we have this big name, We cannot ask him. We need a younger person. Oh, I can see Kalish. Oh, we have a genius there at Berkeley. Let's get him." And so they got him as soon as possible. And so I found the back and forth when they wanted to hire him, when Montague could make it. Montague was trying to stay at Berkeley as long as possible to finish working on the dissertation, but at the same time, you know know he didn't want to say no to the job and so that's the compromise that they found that he would arrive in January, end of January 1955. So that's the I think he's part of that...

HK:
Thank you for telling me all this. Very interesting.

IC:
I think we I think we covered everything else. I believe. Let me double check since you have the list. But in my mind, yes, the one about Prior, I can ask you about that. The study and then Lewis. Yeah.

HK: 2:51:17-2:51:20
I think... Okay. So it's now close to 1 o'clock.

