SPEAKER_00: 0:00:00-0:02:08
 I think they're both wonderful.  And I have my own coffee.  And I also, well first, I brought a little thing to say thank you to you guys.  Oh, you don't have to do that.  There was supposed to be a little...  You don't have to do that.  It's some chocolate from San Diego.  Oh, love chocolate.  And they also, they're packed in, each of them is packed separately.  So that you're not going to be tempted.  You can eat one at a time. You're gonna eat one right now.  Yeah. I'm a chocoholic. Thank you.  Perfect.  Well, see, this is where we're headed.  You guys are going to Rome?  August 24th.  Yeah. Fantastic.  We go to Rome.  I'm so jealous.  For five weeks.  Five weeks.  Nice.  But not all in Rome.  You guys traveling?  We're gonna stay overnight.  Yes.  We're going with my son and his wife.  Then we go, and my brother lives there.  He's gonna meet us. Oh. We go going with my son and his wife. Then we go, and my brother lives there, he's going to meet us.  Oh!  We go to, my grandparents are from Guanyin.  Nice, you're going there?  Yes, for two days.  Nice.  And Naples, we'll see Naples.  Yes.  Then we're going to come back up to Lucca, spend a couple of days there.  And then my son has a house in Palerone.  You know where that is?  No, where is it?  It's near Pisa.  Beautiful. Near Genoa.  30 miles. Along the coast or the mountain? I think it's in... Inside. We're about 30  miles from Genoa, which is my roots. I'm a Genovan. Oh, you're from Genoa? I'm Genovan.  Nice. And we're from the south. My parents, my mother was born here, but she came here when she was only one year old.  Wow.  But we're all glad she did.  So is this the first time that you guys went to those places?  No, no. My son was married in Italy in 2008.  And he moved there?  No, he lives here, but he goes there all the time.  I see.  He's a citizen now and everything.  And you said you also have a brother that lives in Italy? My brother has lived in Italy for about 22 years.  OK.  So you're from?  From Netuno.  Your family?  Oh, Netuno.  Yeah.  Netuno, yeah.  Not too far from Rome.  I know where it is.  Yes.  He goes to Rome all the time.  Nice.  Open this up for me if you can.  Oh, you want me to help you?  Yeah, I was going to try.  Yeah, sometimes it'll be tricky.  Oh, that's nice.  I want to make you laugh before you start.  Sorry? I'm going to make you laugh before you start. Sorry?  I want to make you laugh before you start.  Please, please, please.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:08-0:02:19
 My son and his wife, I said, why did you buy a place in Palerone?  He said, he's like me, he doesn't like a lot of people.  He said, it's very small, we walk wherever we want to go, we walk.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:19-0:02:41
 So I said, well, how small is it?  He said, Dad, the city limit signs are back to back.  Well, it's going to be a huge difference from here.  Oh yeah, that's where we're going to rest.  That's a fantastic place. And actually, it's also, I mean, you're going to find, I was  a little bit worried that you'd be in an area that is too hot, but that area, even in the  summer, I think it's cool enough.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:41-0:02:42
 Oh, I hope so.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:42-0:39:53
 Yeah, especially if they're a little bit on the hilly side.  Because Italy, actually I talked to my parents and they told me that the summer has not been  too hot so far.  That's what my brother said.  I just talked to his son.  Last year was really, really hot.  But they keep having rain and so it alternates and then it gets nicely sunny but breezy.  He said he hasn't even used his fan that he has in the house.  Perfect, that's fantastic.  I'm so jealous.  I was thinking of going back to Italy in September,  but I'm going to postpone now because I'm working on the book  and then class starts.  But what I'm doing is that I'm going  to go back in December earlier.  So as soon as classes are over at the beginning of December,  I leave and I spend one month there.  One month? Good.  I haven't seen my family for almost one year, but December is going to be one year.  Oh.  And I want to see them.  You've got to go at least once a year.  Yeah, yeah.  And then we already planned next summer, in August, my parents are celebrating their 50th anniversary.  And they're coming to San Diego to celebrate.  Where do they live?  So they live near Milan.  Near Milan.  Although originally they are from Salerno, which is south of Naples.  But when they got married, they moved to Milan to find a better job,  so my brother and I were born in Milan.  Milan.  And, can I help you?  I know they are tricky.  It's good, this is good.  At home you can just get scissors, but yeah, they are tricky.  Oh, thanks.  You're welcome. And so, I grew up, They told me you can just get scissors, but yeah, they are tricky. Oh, thanks.  You're welcome.  And so, I grew up, my brother and I grew up in Milan, but all the summers when we were  kids we went back to the south with my grandparents because my parents were working and there  was no, you know, there was no childcare at that time.  And so, I know both and the south is so amazing and exciting.  I've never been to the south.  That's true.  Although, August, be careful a little bit because it can get hot, the south is so amazing and exciting. I've never been to the south. That's true. Although August be careful a little bit because it can get hot.  It's very hot. Hopefully you know. I've got to pack accordingly.  Our son was married when? September 13th? September 13, 2009. He was married up in Volterra.  Oh okay. Volterra is nicely hot. And we're going to go there too.  Oh, Volterra is so beautiful. Isn't it nice there? It's such an old, old town.  That's one of the parts of Italy that I like the most.  All that beautiful stuff they make there.  Yes, yes.  Alabaster.  You know, when they were still building these little towns on top of the hills, so that  they would be protected.  In these days it means they are quieter, they don't get too big, they are cool.  I mean, it's really, really nice.  I'm so jealous, guys.  I'm so jealous, guys. So I got my own copy of the questions.  Here it is, so I can follow you. And also, one thing that I brought in,  I have a, I made some printout of the pictures that I found on the earbooks.  Later I have some questions, because maybe you can help me with a couple of questions, like the choir and so on.  If you can recognize some of those.  Okay.  So, wherever you want to start from.  All right.  It's all totally up to you.  I'll start with issue one.  Okay.  Perfect.  And by the way, I have a copy of the transcripts in case you...  Man, you managed to get that, huh?  Yeah, because the way I did it is that I found a relative.  He's a faraway relative, but he's the only living relative and he gets the royalties  from Montague's book.  No kidding. Because, you know, the family, now that I reconstructed the family, unfortunately  it's one of those families that progressively had fewer and fewer kids and you know and  Montague... Parents are gone. Yeah and Richard was an only child. The parents had him when  they were already old. Actually maybe you guys can tell me. So, in 1930, if you were a couple that had been married for 15 years, so the mother was 36  and the father was 40, they had their first child. That was not like these days, do you  agree? I mean, usually couples at that time, they tended to have children early on.  Yes, they married late maybe. Yeah. No, actually, I checked.  They married in 1915.  Wow.  I didn't wait so long to have them.  See, I was born in 31, so he had to be born around 30.  Yes, Richard was born in 1930.  I found the birth certificate.  But I also found the marriage certificate of the parents.  And they got married in 1915.  Why did they wait 15 years?  My goodness.  I don't know. I mean, like, I don't know.  What I know is that within her family  there were not many children.  So I don't know if they were all sisters  and they have very few children.  I'll bet your Richard was an accident.  I wonder. I don't know.  They probably didn't plan to have any.  Yes, probably, I don't know.  On the other hand, I know that the mother was very  protective and care-giving. And I know for sure that he was born, I don't know. On the other hand, I know that the mother was very protective and care-giving.  And I know for sure that he was born, I found the birth certificate, and he was born at the hospital.  So it was not even a tomb. Do you have a sense of how common it was to go...  There were only two hospitals in Stockton. St. Joseph's and Denver.  St. Joseph's, yeah. Was it common, Rose, do you have a sense if it was common for women in 1930 to give birth at a hospital?  I was born in a house.  He was born in a hospital.  I was in Brooklyn.  And you were?  Born and raised right here.  Were you born in St. Joseph's?  I have no idea.  You don't know?  I can't remember.  But don't you remember?  I was Caesarian, I know that.  It had to be St. Joseph's. It had to be St. Joseph's.  But I know for sure that in the case of Richard's mother,  it was not Caesarian.  Because the birth certificate specifies it was natural.  Otherwise they would say, they even measure the kind of thing...  So, was she 30 when she got married, are you saying?  She was... No, she was... Okay.  When she got married, she was born in 1894.  She was 21.  21?  21.  Oh, 21. So, she had the baby 15 years later, she was 21. 21? 21.  Oh, 21.  So she had the baby 15 years later.  At 36.  She was 36.  Wow.  And the father was 40 when they had the baby.  But they had been married for 15 years.  So that sounds a little bit strange.  You know, of course things are always possible, but because...  Yeah, that is strange.  And I know for sure that, you know, I got a little bit suspicious.  I thought, well, maybe they adopted him.  But no, the birth certificate clearly says that she is the biological mother.  The doctor signed the certificate after the giving birth.  And then I found a picture of her. I'm comparing Richard's pictures with her that you can totally see.  So she's the biological mother.  I don't know about the father.  So we don't know. 22nd of August. Yes. 22nd? Yes. We will be celebrating our 62nd. 62 years.  We've been married 62 years. Congratulations. Congratulate. You guys are going to be in  Italy at that time, is it correct? No, we leave on the 24th. So you celebrate here and then you continue the celebration  in Italy. Feel sorry for me? No. No. I'm so jealous. Totally jealous. Not sorry, jealous.  All right, I'm going to start with this Otis. First of all, the Otis was an IQ test, which  you know we cannot give anymore. It's considered not politically correct to give IQ tests.  You give achievement tests, but you don't give IQs.  Okay, so it's no longer allowed in schools?  No longer. We no longer give that.  But I was testing director at St. Mary's for over 20 years,  so I know every test has a number or a letter after it just to distinguish it just to say what what test it is  So that's what that s must mean. So is this so that's what it is  You see it says all these class s right and it was given there, right?  Yes, and he had a 127 in those days. That was high  I know I was still these days by the way from what I've seen because in the oldest test that's high  That's a high IQ.  Is it a high IQ?  Yes.  OK, so good to know, actually.  I think mine was like 114 or 115.  So he was high.  And you were a super smart one, from what I know.  I know.  I mean, I saw you.  I wasn't too dumb.  Well.  OK.  So that's what that is.  It's just the version of the test.  The kind of test.  OK, kind of test.  And I do not know what EQ means.  Yeah, you see, it's this weird...  IQ is intelligence quotient.  What could EQ mean?  When he had another number there.  You see, there is IQ 127, EQ 135...  I was going to Google it, I never had a chance to do it.  I tried to Google it.  I found the autism class by Googling it and what it means but  it doesn't say anything.  Well, it's okay.  I have no idea what that means.  You confirmed that IQ is the intelligent test, is that correct?  Yeah, IQ is intelligence quotient.  Okay, so let me write, kind of test.  She was out of commission for a week, so period.  Yeah, so it was your carpal tunnel? I had tendonitis and a ganglion  and then I take a blood thinner so I turn it off. Oh, I see. But I noticed that you  really have good mobility of your hand. Not bad. Pretty good. It's been almost two weeks.  Wow, congratulations. So, what I'm going to do is, let me write myself a note, I'm going to ask the girls that do  the testing at St. Mary's now, if they have any idea what EQ means.  Okay, thank you, I appreciate that.  And I'll email you.  Thank you, thank you, I really appreciate it.  And can I ask you, one thing that I was wondering is the date of the test. So it was taken on June 15, 1944, which was at the end of his first year,  because he joined St. Mary in 1943.  Was it normal to give it at the end of the year?  The first year?  I guess it was.  I don't recall when they used to do it.  Normally, they give it at the beginning of the year.  That's what I thought, yeah.  When I lived in the East, I went there until fifth grade.  We always had the beginning of the year. Yeah, that's what I thought, yeah. When I lived in the East, I went there till fifth grade. We always had the beginning of the year every year,  every year. I'm having a feel that we had it every year here too. Okay. But I can't  swear to it. I see. One thing, I don't know if this... See, you never heard anything but  A's. Yeah, I know. Jeez. I know. But I've got it. Okay, so probably, but as far as you know,  it was normal for St. Mary's to do the IQ.  Yes, to do that. They wouldn't have just singled him out to give him an IQ.  Okay, okay. It was a general strategy.  Everybody took it.  Okay, good. That's what was important. Okay.  So we've got to look about it here.  For everybody?  Yes, we've got that.  Perfect.  Yes, every student took it.  Yes, for everybody.  Every student took it.  Uh-huh.  And...  Yeah, and it was after his first year for whatever reason.  Now you might ask, you're going to meet with Mary and her group,  ask them if we took it every year.  That I can't remember.  Okay, ask them.  I would imagine we did.  But then if we did, why isn't it listed?  Do they just give it once?  It looks like it.  Now, as far as the languages...  You were not required to take Latin.  You chose your language.  And some people chose French, some people chose Spanish.  He took three. All three.  Ok, so the requirement was to take one language class.  And you could choose?  Well, you could take more than one.  But at the time, they were following the University of California requirements,  which was two years of a foreign language, so you chose what you want.  I happened to choose Spanish.  Did Latin count as a foreign language?  It was in those days. Very common.  So you could have taken Latin and satisfied the University of California requirements.  Yeah, but then a lot of students probably took Latin and then something else.  I just took the Spanish.  So he took all three of them. Yeah, in fact I... of students probably took Latin and then something else. I just took the Spanish.  So he took all three of them.  Yeah.  But it was not required.  It was not required.  It was not required?  If you wanted to go to college, then you followed the University of California requirements.  Language requirements and all the others.  I also taught Latin at St. Mary's.  And my last class was somewhere around early 2000s  and then it just died out. They're not teaching Latin anymore? No more. Really? Terrible. That is really a tragedy.  Yeah. Nobody wants to take it, Ivano. You know what they want to take now? What is it?  Sign language. Fine, but the two things cannot be compared. You know what  the worst thing that ever happened? Was when the universities decided to accept sign language  as a language requirement. Why did they do that? Somebody should tell them, because that's  what I tell my students. I wish somebody would. Yeah, I said look, even if you're interested  because where I teach there are lots of students who are interested in like biomed, premed.  I said look, if you study Latin Latin you're going to learn all those roots  that are going to help you understand all the terminology  I've talked to hairdressers who said they had to take Latin to pass their test  to know the bones in the head  yeah, exactly, yes, because they're all Latin  you know, I don't understand  so in St. Mary's, the French is gone.  The French too?  Sign language killed French. When the German came in, it killed the Latin.  The students who would have made it Latin, they veered over to the French.  I see.  I mean to the German.  I see.  So then French hung on for a while, but French disappeared.  As soon as sign language came in, a couple of years later, gone was the French. So what the French so they now teach Spanish and Italian. At least Italian is still there.  Italian is still there as long as Luigi's there. I see. You know I don't know if  they're gonna when he leaves it's not easy to find Italian teachers when he  leaves I hate to see us down to Spanish and sign language. Not Spanish. Universities say, or most admissions directors say,  take a language that has a literature, a written literature, and is spoken.  Yeah, I mean, crucially, because you also want to learn to read the language.  Exactly.  It's important, but you cannot do that, and there is no literary tradition with ASL.  But see, in sign language, you don't have to write, you don't have to speak.  I know, I know, I know, because...  So they take the easy way out.  The easy way, yeah, I know.  And so the UC requirements at that time was you had to take two years...  I'm pretty sure they were the same then.  I don't think there were any less than they are now.  Two years of a foreign language.  It used to be, Ivano, two years of one language.  No, I think it was three.  Oh, three?  Three years of one or two of two.  Oh, three years of one?  I think that is what it used to be.  I can check because I...  You should be able to find that out at your university.  Yeah, actually I found the catalog.  Get an old catalog.  I found it. I have the 1948 catalog, which is the first year Richard went to...  Find that out because I'm almost sure it used to be three of one or two of two.  Two plus two.  Yeah.  Perfect.  So what's next?  So number three...  No, you were not required...  Okay, yeah, you told me that.  So, music choral was obviously a choir class.  I did not take that.  Oh, you did not?  Let me ask you if you recognize anybody in this picture.  Oh, is that the picture?  So the quality is very low because, you know,  remember those are like, they were tiny pictures  that I blew up.  Even if the resolution is very high,  so to make it big.  So in the senior year, 1947, 46, 47,  I found this picture, which is a tiny one.  You know, I think that's me.  I thought it was you.  Yes, we had a choir.  So do you think this could be Richard?  I'm pretty sure it is. He played the organ. So do you think that would be Richard?  This or this one or the other is me  Look dad. Does this look like me? It's really hard, but I think that's the one  Does this look like me? It's really hard, but I...  Wait a minute, now hold on.  I think that's the one.  Let me look at it.  And was your sister in the choir as well?  My sister was in the choir.  Because you guys, I mean, I can see from the pictures you resemble each other.  Yeah, I think that's...  This one.  That's me.  That's not you, that's...  And that's my sister, I think.  I think that's your sister, is it correct?  Yes, yes.  This is Rose.  Let me write it down.  Her name was Mary.  Okay, so this is Rose.  Yeah.  Rose.  And Mary.  And Mary. And I know that's Richard because he played the organ for us.  And so does it mean that Richard was directing the choir?  Yes, he did.  He directed the choir.  So you can confirm that.  Yeah.  So the school, St. Mary's, had a choir?  Yes, yes.  And this was, this is the cathedral.  I went inside, yeah.  That's the cathedral.  It's the upper part of the cathedral.  So you guys had a choir in the school, but you were performing inside the church, or This is the cathedral. I went inside, yeah. It's the upper part of the cathedral.  So you guys had a choir in the school,  but you were performing inside the church,  or this was the church choir?  We performed in the church.  But it was the school choir, not the church choir.  That's right. Well, there may have been a church choir, but...  But these are all school people.  These are all school people.  This is Ivana Urbani.  She was my friend, my very good friend.  So this is... and you remember that Richard was in charge of the choir?  Yes, he was. He was in charge of the choir.  So I'm thinking in this...  This is Richard then. ...in this music choral class, I'm wondering if that was the music choral class.  I think that, because you see, it appears every year, music choral class. I think that because you see it appears every year.  Music choral, he had it in 1943-44, that's the first year.  And then I think he had, let's see, he had other credits as well.  What did I see?  I thought I saw music choral.  Yes, you see, he took Spanish 2 and then...  See, he didn't take Spanish 1.  No, because I wonder...  Probably he already knew somehow.  And then, you see, instead of Spanish,  they wrote Choral 2 and Choral 3 and Choral 4.  Yeah.  So he must have replaced these classes, you see.  You know what I'm going to do?  I'm going to look up my transcript to see if I took Music Choral.  Can you compare that? Yes. Did I take... You know what I'm gonna do? I'm gonna look up my transcript to see if I took musical.  Can you compare that?  Yes. Did I take? So I can get in there and look at mine.  Thank you. Because I saw that he took Latin I, II and III. He took French I and II and Spanish went directly to Spanish II.  Unless he knew some already or took it in summer study.  Yeah, or studied by his own, knowing how good he was at learning.  Knowing that, he could have done that.  He could have done that.  OK, I will look that up.  Because he did Spanish II in his last year, you see?  Spanish II was 46, 47.  So probably he started by his own.  I have no idea who taught the choral class.  See, that's the problem.  The yearbook doesn't give you, the transcript doesn't give you the names of the teachers.  But so, you confirm that there was a class called choral?  Yes. It's got to be if it's on the transcript.  So if it's on the transcript, it means it's an official class.  I'm just wondering if this was the class.  That's what I'm wondering.  But if it's listed as a class, it means that there must have been some sort of teacher.  It's not an independent class.  You know, you guys were getting together and singing.  The only nun that I can think of who sang beautifully was Sister Esther.  She's not listed here.  Oh, so she's not here.  Yeah, and I don't know why she's not there.  Sister Esther was there the time we were there.  Okay, so...  She had a beautiful, beautiful voice. Sister... S-E-S-T-H-E-R, I think.  S-E-S-T-H-E-R.  S-E-S-T-H-E-R.  She's gone.  S-E-S-T-H-E-R.  Esther.  Yeah.  Actually, Rose, can I ask you?  Yeah.  What does it mean, the M in front of all the...  They all have Mary.  They're all named Mary.  Sister Mary Davis, Sister Mary Esther.  Oh, okay.  They're all named Mary.  I was wondering, like, is it possible that all of them have the same name?  It's a title. Yeah. I see, I see. They all of them have the same name? It's a title.  Yeah, yeah.  I see, I see.  They all have Mary as their...  And this is their last name.  Dorothy, Jordan, Gregory.  That's...  No, Sister Mary David Barry.  See, David...  In those days, the nuns took a saint's name for their name.  Oh, I didn't know that.  Thank you for telling me.  Yeah, today they don't do that.  So, okay, so M is Mary for everybody.  David is the name of the saint she chose.  Who was David? Was there a Saint David?  David and Goliath?  I lost me.  She chose David and her family name was Barry.  B-A-R-R-Y  B-A-R-R-Y  Barry.  And you know what a family that was?  They were all priests and nuns practically.  Oh, really?  All priests and nuns.  This woman was the most brilliant nun I've ever known.  She had a master's, she had a PhD.  She had a PhD?  Yes.  She was very well educated.  Just brilliant.  Do you remember what PhD in what she had?  I would imagine theology, but I'm not positive.  Okay, PhD for sure though. You are sure that she had a PhD?  Oh yes, I'm positive.  Master and PhD.  And she was my English teacher. She taught English.  Most of the nuns taught religion as well.  She taught English.  Do you have a sense of how old Sister David or any other nuns could have been at that time?  This is the thing. You never could tell how old they were because of the way they wore their habits.  I see.  And you know, those habits were a natural facelifter.  They never had any wrinkles.  But like, roughly, are we talking about people in their 30s, or their 40s, or their 50s,  or their 60s, because that's, you know, there's still a difference.  I would say 30s, 40s.  But listen to me.  Oh, they were young then.  When I went to teach at St. Mary's in 1968, Sister David had come back.  She came back to St. Mary's in the late 60s.  And she was, they were just starting a counseling department  and I had been a counselor at Lodi High School.  So the principal called me and said,  we want you to join the council.  At that time, it was Sister David  and one gentleman, Mr. Dillon, and I.  The three of us were the counseling department.  Wow.  So she must have, in the 30s, in the 40s, so she cannot have been too old because if  she came back in the 60s...  The kid probably was in her 40s, maybe early 50s.  Yeah, and then she was like...  I'm trying to think when she left St. Mary's, she died many years later.  She died when she was in San Rafael.  Oh, she moved away. We all died when she was in San Rafael.  We all ended up going back to San Rafael.  I see. Because that's where they were coming from?  Yeah, that's where the Dominican Order was. That's their main spot.  Okay, so now I better understand the music chorale issue.  But the music chorale was not a required class.  No.  So it was an optional one. Yes.  Definitely you don't have to take it for four years.  No.  I don't know how we can find out  if this was actually the class.  Because this appears on the yearbook,  the 1946-47 yearbook, as one of the pictures,  like they say senior choir, so it must have been.  Yeah, senior choir.  You can't remember?  Pardon?  You can't remember?  I can't remember if it was...  I know I sang in the choir.  That's me, for sure.  And I know that's my sister.  And I know that's Bonnie.  And you know, I can't think of her name, but I know her, I know her...  Was she in your class?  This one.  Oh my God.  So what's the name?  This is Bonnie, you said?  That's Bonnie.  Uh, Ur-Bonnie, she was in high school. U-R-B-A-N-I.  She was in high school.  What about her name?  Patricia Graham.  Oh, Patricia Graham.  That was Patricia Graham.  You sure?  Yeah, positive.  G-R-A-H-A-M.  She's dead. A lot of these people are dead.  I'm alive, my sister's gone, Bonnie's alive.  You said Patricia?  Patricia Graham. Let me see if I recognize anybody else.  Well, yesterday I went to interview, I went to Gold River in Sacramento.  Oh, you saw Ed Barakat.  Ed Barakat, yeah, yeah.  Bonnie, I can't figure out who those boys are.  That's Richard for sure.  I think it's Richard.  I thought so because his back, now I'm so familiar, and his hair, his hair was, I would  say, receding.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Even when he was young, yeah.  Even when he was young, so he confirmed that.  So the next issue has to do with shorthand.  You see, on his craft, he has to do with shorthand. You see, on this craft, we have...  Oh, in shorthand.  Let me tell you this.  The only non-nun that taught at St. Mary's was Mrs. Ligorio.  Okay, so Josephine, Jo Bertolucci was right that she said, oh, you need to add Camille  Ligorio.  Camille Ligorio.  Okay.  She taught the business classes.  A business class.  Not all of them, because I had typing from one of the nuns.  I can't remember her name.  Okay, business classes. But she taught shorthand. Sh from one of the nuns. I can't remember her name.  Okay, business classes.  But she taught shorthand, she taught, you know, office stuff.  Oh, that's what her goal was. Office stuff. Okay.  Yeah, like office practice I think they called it.  And she was not a nun.  Not a nun.  Uh-huh.  Okay, Sister David was principal. I don't, I do not remember Sister Dorothy at all.  Okay.  But...  Maybe they just left here.  I do remember Sister Jordan. I don't know her family name.  She was my algebra teacher. She taught math.  Oh, good, good. Algebra.  And you said, Sister David, she was teaching English, you said?  English. Probably religion.  Most of the ladies did.  Okay. Most of the nuns did. Now, Sister Gregory, she taught religion and Latin.  She was the Latin teacher.  Latin plus religion.  And this is strange. I do not know Sister Gerald or Sister Christopher.  Isn't that strange?  You remember Sister Colette?  Oh yeah.  Now, Colette I can tell you about.  Okay.  You know Sister Colette? Colette taught, I can tell you about. Okay. You know Sister Collette?  Collette taught, I think she taught history.  History.  I think I had her for civics.  History.  But, she ended up coming back to St. Mary's as a principal.  Oh.  During what years?  During the, oh gosh, was it the 70s?  You know it's too bad you don't get into the yearbook room, so you look at all these  yearbooks that will tell you who was the principal.  Yes, I did, but the problem is that the only information that the yearbooks have is like  they say who's the principal and that's it.  They list the teachers, but they don't tell you what they were teaching.  All right, sister, collect.  When did Father Fowling come in?  Oh, he came in the 70s.  So she had to be before the 70s.  Before the 70s. She had he came in the 70s.  Well then, so she had to be before the 70s. She had to be in the 60s.  I see, so she came back as a principal. At that time she was teaching history. I don't know if she was  teaching. I know when she was there as a teacher, she was in social studies.  Yeah, history, social studies. When she came back as principal, I don't know if she taught. Yeah, but when she was there,  when you were there as a student, she was teaching social studies.  Then, when she was no longer principal,  she was kind of a retired nun,  she worked in what I do now, the alumni office.  I see, I see.  I worked with her.  And of course it wasn't as big as it is now,  because in those days,  the memorial program was not what it is today.  You know, people die, relatives and friends send in money. They did send it in then, but  now, oh my God, you should see what I have on the computer. So it was just the two of  us could handle it very easily and I only worked with her for one hour a day. I taught  the rest of the day and that was more than enough. But she did all that. She did all of that.  And so, Rose, can I ask you, is it likely that Sister Jordan, besides teaching algebra, may have taught the other?  Because I see that there is also like general arithmetics, geometry.  She might have taught geometry as well. I'm trying to think if I had her for geometry.  There's one nun you  don't mention here, Sister Grace. Oh, Grace. Sister Grace taught chemistry. Grace. And  advanced math. G-R-A-C-E. G-R-A-C-E. I taught, I mean I had chemistry from her. Chemistry.  And I also had trigonometry and solid geometry from her. Oh, okay.  Which today they don't call it that.  They call it, what do they call it?  Just trigonometry?  Yeah.  Yeah.  But it was called trigonometry and solid geometry.  I think I saw it here.  Geometry, yes, geometry.  Did it say solid?  They had plain geometry.  Yeah, that's regular geometry.  Which he did not take.  But then he has  geometry, I don't know why they put it here. I don't either. Chemistry, that's what it says. Physics.  Yeah, physics. And then all the history component. Okay. And I think a lot of... I would  venture to say that Sister Grace taught the physics as well. Okay. I'm not positive. Okay. Let me put a  question mark. You think Sister Grace? Grace. I know she taught chemistry.  I had her.  Physics?  Let's put a question mark.  Maybe.  And I know I had her for solid geometry.  Okay, where are we now?  So, we were at issue number four.  We were talking about shorthand.  Okay, the shorthand in typing was taught by...  Ligorio.  Cammi Ligorio, but I had typing from a nun and I can't think of her name.  So short-handed was for sure Ligorio.  Short-handed was definitely Ligorio.  And typing was Diana.  She taught typing as well, but the other nun taught it too. What was her name?  The only class I ever got a C in was typing.  I can't coordinate my fingers. I know, believe me, I never learned it.  Can't think of her name? I can't think of her name. Of course you got A in it. Yeah, of course.  So, can I ask you, shorthand and typewriting, number one, were they required classes? No.  Number two, were they required, would boys take that class? There would be boys that took it.  There would be boys, okay. You know, when I went to St. Mary's in those days,  there were two tracks. College prep, business.  That was it. So a lot of the girls who wanted to go into business,  like they didn't want to go into college really,  they took the business track. They took the typing, the shorthand, along with the  religion and the English  and all the other required stuff.  And then those who were planning to go to college  went the college track.  But if we could, we fit in typing.  I never took shorthand, but I did take typing.  I mean, because I was wondering,  like Richard, when he graduated in 47,  he went for one year to Stockton Junior College.  Yes, I did too.  And I found notes in his archive.  He kept the notes in the class, and he used lots of shorthand.  He took shorthand there too?  No, no, he used shorthand for his class, which made me think he already knew shorthand.  That tells you how smart he is.  He knew he was going to be taking notes in college, so he took shorthand.  Shorthand, yep, yep, yep.  Stockton Junior College is what today is Delta.  Delta, yes, yes, and I went there to check for records.  Yeah, I went there one year too.  Okay, perfect, so short hand and typewriting,  these were like encouraged for people  that want to pursue the business,  but also college people would take it.  Or anybody else who wanted to fit it in.  And you know, guys and girls could take it.  Yes, not many guys did it, but mostly girls, yeah.  Okay, mainly girls, yeah. Okay, mainly girls.  Yeah.  Okay, and then...  Yeah, non-Cath is non-Cath.  Yes, so there were no Catholic in the school.  The school was open to non-Cath.  Yes, but there weren't that many.  There weren't that many.  Non-Many.  Today we have a lot.  Non-Many.  Not in those days there wasn't a lot,  but yes, they had to participate in religious functions  Everybody had to do that  We even had Muslims who had to participate  in our gatherings  I see  Nobody gets excused  One thing  It sounds like there were religion classes  and this was one thing  and then there was service like mass  Masses  Like for holy days we always had masses and everything and everybody had to go one thing and then there was service like masses. Yeah, masses. So these were two separate things.  Like for holy days we always had masses and everything and everybody had to go.  And so religion classes instead were like the teaching of religion.  Inquired.  Inquired from everybody.  Do you remember a student which probably was here ahead of you, his name I think was Bob  Sherwood.  Bob Sherwood, Bob Sherwood.  Do you remember?  That sounds familiar.  You think he was 1947? Yeah, same class as Richard. Bob Sherwood. Bob Sherwood. Bob Sherwood. That sounds familiar.  You think he was 1947?  Yeah, same class as Richard.  The reason why is because, so let me ask this background  question.  When you say, I took religion, when you were taking that class,  were you guys divided by years?  Like, oh, people could mix.  For example, when you take time from here.  Believe it or not, we were divided by boys and girls  because they didn't want to talk about certain things in mixed classes.  For religion, you mean? Or in general?  But I think that might have been in our junior year.  These people you're meeting with this afternoon, they could probably tell you.  But I remember once being in a religion class with all girls.  We talked about, you know, abortions... Oh, I see. You know, sexual relations, all that stuff. And they didn't  want boys and girls together. But for the other classes, all the other topics, you guys  were mixed. It was a co-ed school. Yes, it was a co-ed school. All classes co-ed. Perfect.  So issue number six. So this is a question, see on the transcripts this is previous training  that's an elementary school Don went there. I can ask you okay so because the  puzzle is the following I know for sure that Richard when he started elementary  school I know for sure that he started Jackson. Jackson. So there was a  school called Jackson. Yes did you go to Jackson? Yeah. Perfect, I'm going to ask you some questions about Jackson then. You know how long ago?  You can ask me, but Jesus Christ.  I know, I know.  70 years ago.  But was it kindergarten to eighth grade in those days?  Yeah.  Yeah.  So because of that, so I found somebody who was in class with Richard in elementary school  at Jackson.  Wow.  Her name is Jo, I think now Delaney?  Joe Delaney, I know Joe Delaney.  She knows you.  Yes, I know Joe Delaney.  Yeah, she told me that she knows you.  Yes, yes.  So I talked to her last time I was here  and she was wonderful and she told me,  unfortunately, says Ivano, it's a little bit too late,  a dear friend of hers was also a dear friend of Richard  and his name was Aldo.  He worked as a librarian for many years.  Aldo, and so he had just passed away,  and he had a picture of him and Richard in second grade.  Oh, be darned.  But that picture is gone.  She was not able to find it.  Oh, too bad.  So, I know.  So, I know for sure that Richard started at Jackson  because his parents were living  at that time up to 1940 until the age of 10, they were living in Hunter Street, South Hunter  Street, which is very close to where Jackson was. But then in 1940 they moved to Bristol  Avenue.  That would be close to El Dorado.  Does it make sense then?  Yes.  So probably what happened is that at age 10 he must have transferred.  Because El Dorado was on Harding Way.  I went to El Dorado too.  So where were you living when you went to El he must have transferred. Because Eldorado is on Harding Way. I went to Eldorado too.  So where were you living when you went to Eldorado?  I lived on Kensington.  Kensington.  So those would all fit into Eldorado School.  Bristol, Kensington.  But don't, can I ask you, when you went to Jackson, where were you living when you went  to Jackson?  Out south on, south Eldorado.  We lived above a grocery store.  Okay, so that makes sense.  Probably.  Yeah. Jackson. Out south on South El Dorado. We lived above a grocery store.  Okay, so that makes sense. Probably Richard's family.  That was Jackson. Didn't Anna say she went to grammar school with him?  No, no. So what Anna told me is that she went to Jackson. But Richard, I think, was one  year ahead of her. So Richard was born Because, so Richard was born in 1930,  but for some reason, actually, maybe you can help me.  When, at which age you would normally end  eighth grade at that time?  14.  Okay.  13 or 14.  So Richard ended at 13.  Yeah.  So actually, when he ended,  That makes sense.  It was like June 1943, and he was still 12,  because he turned 13 in September.  So he must have been a little bit ahead.  Yeah.  Because for example, all the classmates that I'm interviewing, that I interviewed yesterday  and today, they told me they're all 1929.  So Richard was 1930, they were classmates, so probably there is this like...  Yeah.  See, my sister was 29 and she was in the class of 47.  Okay, you see.  So that's... So he was ahead.  Okay, so there was...  Okay, now I totally understand.  The family moved and he moved there.  Yeah, when they moved to Bristol, he was...  And El Dorado was, again, another one...  One to eight.  One to eight.  One to eight.  It's still there.  It's still there?  But the original building is now an adult school.  Oh, I don't...  And then there's all these other buildings.  So is that building there? Because I drove by and I thought...  It's not a school anymore.  No, well, it's for adult education. They meet at night, I think.  Is that what it is?  Yeah, because they can't have children. They can't have a lot of children. It's unsafe, they said.  But the building is still there.  The building is still there.  That's the one.  The school is still there.  The school is still there.  I see. I'm going to go and check it again.  It's right on the corner of Hardy and Pacific Avenue.  Yes, yes, totally. I drove there.  Yes, yes. Oh, good.  Let me go and check the building again. Check.  Perfect.  And so, one question that I have is,  do you have a sense of how expensive  St. Mary's High School was those days?  I know exactly.  Oh, I knew that you knew.  My father would write one check for my sister and me for the whole year.  Yes.  Three dollars each a month.  No way.  Sixty bucks.  Three dollars?  Three dollars.  He'd write a sixty dollar check for the whole year.  Do you think it's because your family got a special deal?  No.  No.  No.  It's three dollars each.  Wow.  Tell them.  When our son went there, we paid like sixty-three dollars.  And when our son went there, he graduated in 1977, it was $65 a month.  Now, oh!  I must say, 800.  I went on the website.  More than 800.  It's $8,900.  And Catholics pay more. I mean, non-Catholics pay more.  Yeah, there's a little bit more.  In my day, everybody paid the same.  $3 a month.  Well, I went back because I know you can do these conversions  to have an idea of what's the value of $3 a month in 1930.  I'm sorry, 1943.  So this is going to be roughly the equivalent of $150  these days.  Because one point that I want to make in the book  is that school, private and public school, was much more affordable these days. So, which, because one point that I want to make in the book is that  school, private and public school, was much more affordable these days. Oh yeah.  Which means many more people have the possibility to go. Absolutely. I just thought of another name. Yes, tell me.  Okay, what are the names? Sister Vincent. Vincent. Pharaoh. F-E-R-R-E-R. F-E-R-R-E-R F-E-R-R-E-R  And she was my Spanish teacher.  Spanish teacher.  She taught Spanish.  So probably she taught Spanish to HR too because it took Spanish.  Yes.

default: 0:39:53-0:39:54
 Spanish teacher.

SPEAKER_00: 0:39:54-0:46:34
 Now there was another nun who taught Spanish, Sister Peter.  Sister Mary Peter.  She taught Spanish.  She taught me my second year Spanish.  Was that Peter or Peter?  Peter.  Peter. Like Peter the Rock? Yeah, yeah, the same. And a Spanish teacher as well. She taught Spanish my second year Spanish. Is that Peter or Peter? Peter. Like Peter the Rock?  Yeah, yeah, the same.  And a Spanish teacher as well.  She taught Spanish as well.  I don't know who taught French.  So, these nuns, the ones that you mentioned here,  were all these nuns living in the building next to...  They were in a convent, yes.  So they were all in the convent,  or some of them were coming from outside just to teach  and then they would leave?  No, I once was in the convent or some of them were coming from outside just to teach and then they wouldn't leave? I once was in the convent years after they were gone  and you know what they had upstairs?  They each had a very very small bedroom, a twin bed, a dresser, a chair and that's about it.  That's it.  A little table maybe. That's about it.  And there were a lot of them.  So at one time...  And the priests lived there too.  The priests had their own house.  Yeah, right next door.  Yeah. Well, they still have their...  The obelisk still has their priest house.  Actually, Rose, the priest did not teach at the school.  Is it correct? Because there was the name of the...  I'm trying to remember the name of this...  Monsignor McGough.  McGough, yes.  He did not teach, but he visited a lot.  But he was not...  He would just walk into the classroom  and start spouting out poetry  He was funny  Father Kelly taught?  No, I am going way back to our day  Father Kelly wasn't there  We go back to our day  You are going back to her day?  Yes, Richard was there  I am not sure that all these nuns were there  at the same time  because I have already added how many nuns?  Three?  Yeah, probably, I think they were not updating the yearbooks.  Sister Gerald and Sister Christopher, I don't remember at all.  Gerald and Christopher, let me put a question mark.  Sister Gerald and Sister Christopher and Dorothy, you don't remember them, is that correct?  Dorothy, I do not remember them at all. Good, good. OK, so let me double check if there was anything.  Yes, I have a question about some of the pictures.  First of all, this is a picture, very early on picture.  This is 1943, 44.  This is the year before.  Richard is playing the piano.  So did the school, did St. Mary's have a piano?  They must have had a piano. They had the organ was in the church. The organ was in the piano. So did the school, did St. Mary's have a piano? They must have had a piano. The organ was in the church.  The organ was in the church.  So this might have been in the music choral room.  They had to have something.  Oh, so there was a room.  They had to have something.  So there was a room dedicated to...  Yeah, had to be.  Okay.  And you know what? I recognize her, but I can't think of her name.  That's a good picture of them, too. Your group this afternoon should be able to name these people.  Yes, yes, because they're the best. Actually, the names are here.  Oh, Mark Chase, Huddleston, Montague, Rich Wayne, Wadad. Wadad Rich Wayne. That's her name.  Yes, yes, she had an unusual name, I remember.  Costa and Etchelet, I don't know. Wadad Rich Wayne. I know her. She's still alive.  Yeah, I saw the name. I wrote her.  She's married to Paul Jacobs.  Does she live in Stockton?  She lives in Stockton.  Paul Jacobs' sister Shirley went to school with me.  And his family, they're all gone.  Except Paul, Paul's the last one in the family.  Jacobs.  And let me ask you, I have a question about...  Yes, so this is the picture of the senior class officers in 1946-47.  Bernice Parenti.  Yes.  Eddie Brennan.  Okay.  And the president...  Who's Russell?  This guy?  It must be that guy, I don't know.  Montague.  Parenti.  There may be some other name that got cut because I made the picture bigger. President... Who's Russell? This guy? It must be that guy, I don't know. Montague?  I mean, there may be some other name that got cut because I made the picture bigger, so...  Somebody's missing, right?  Yeah, there's somebody missing.  The name is missing here.  Probably it was under here, but it got cut.  I have that picture.  He might have been E. Russell.  I don't know who this guy was.  So, I want to ask you, what's the surgeon at arms?  Oh, yeah, they're supposed to keep order at your meetings.  Oh, that's right.  When we have our class meetings, they stand up there like this, and they keep order.  Okay, it's just an honorary thing.  Like a policeman.  Oh yeah, I can imagine Richard, how intimidating it was.  Was he a sergeant at arms?  Yes, he was a sergeant at arms.  So, let's see.  Oh, this was just a picture that they put on the first year book.  And I think this is him. There's no name but it looks like him.  He probably rode his bike to school.  Yeah, yeah, probably looks like, yeah.  And this looks, I think, sort of a briefcase, I think.  So I want to ask you, what did students use those days to carry books and things?  Well they didn't have backpacks, I'll tell you that.  We didn't even know what a backpack was.  So you either had a briefcase or you just carried them in your arms.  Was it common for students to have briefcases?  Not a lot of them did, but Richard was the type that would.  Yeah, that's what I'm asking, because when I saw this, I didn't see any other, but this looks like his style.  Yeah, there weren't that many.  And so, this is, okay, this is the junior class.  This is the junior class. Is he in here?  I want to ask you...  Yes, I think this is Richard.  Oh, there he is. You see?  He wore a sweater.  Yes, yes.  Oh, your group is going to know all of these people.  Yeah.  I wonder if your sister... Is your sister here too?  Oh, she should be. Let's see if I have the picture.  Your sister?  Yeah, this is her class.  How come she's not in there?  Because sometimes they divide the class into two.  So, Rose, your maiden name is...  Simonelli.  Here it is.  Here you are. Honor Society 46, 47. You are somewhere  down here, right? So Rose Simonelli. Where are you? Here I am. Here you are. Oh my God.  And Mary Levis, she was my friend. Oh, that's Mary Levis. Oh, not pictured, I'm sorry. Prado.  This is Prado. Virginia Quinn became a nun. She's a Dominican nun. She's still around. Donna  Laurie. I think it was Bill Trout. Lorraine Budisilich. Paul Bernardico. Richard Montague. T. Cavanaugh, S. Mariani, Dolores Doudenrous, Michael Michel, Barbara K yours truly, and Fredo.  I don't know, I can't see your sister.  No, my sister's not here.  Probably because there were two pictures of that class, they divided them into, there  were too many.  I don't see her in there.  Yeah, yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:46:34-0:46:37
 Can you see Rose here?  He's wonderful.  Let me see if I can see, yeah, yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 0:46:37-0:54:20
 That's me.  Yeah, yeah.  Let's see if I, this is the Warbonne community.  I have a question for you, Rose. So, um...  Here's my sister.  This is your sister, in fact.  So, you see, they mention all the people here, but the only people that is not mentioned is Richard.  But I think this is Richard. Do you agree that this is Richard?  Yes, it is. Yes, it is.  Yeah, you see?  See, we were in school during the war.  Yes, yes.  And they were selling war bonds and all that stuff.  So, can I ask you, what was the... Do you have a sense of what the War Bond Committee was doing?  Well, uh... Let me think, what did they do?  I know when I was in elementary school, we used to buy stamps and keep them in a book.  And then when you filled up the book, you had a war bond.  So maybe that's what they promoted.  Yeah, Barbara, Mary, my sister Mary Maybe there's Wayman Steed again.  Yes, Wayman Steed.  That's him.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  That's me.  All that hair. Look, I got no hair now.  Oh, yeah, sure. Look at me. This is not hair.  I'm getting there.  Wow.  Wonderful pictures.  Yeah, no, really, really. So let me see if there was another. I think I asked you there. Wow. Wonderful pictures. Yeah, no, really, really.  So let me see if there was another...  I think I asked you all the questions.  This is the sophomore here.  This is, OK, this is the Honor Society in 1945-46.  That looks like what you did.  That's Richard, you're totally right.  That's Honor Society.  Yeah, that's the Honor Society, and I have the names here, actually.  This is the smaller picture with the name.  Richard Montague, wow, very nice.  And see who's here, Michelotti.  Yeah. Oh, Anna is here, Anna Angelini at the bottom.  You're here on the second line.  I didn't know much more, did you?  No, even as a young boy he didn't.  Yeah, it's kind of like evolved quickly,  maybe from the very beginning.  These were all in the 47 years old?  Yes, yes.  No, sorry, 45, 46.  I think you're there too.  It's under Rose, near you.  I was on the Honor Roll every month.  And then you got a pin,  you got to keep it at the end of your senior year.  Wow.  It's an honor pin.  I'm sure Richard got one.  He must have.  He was there every month for all four years.  With those grades he had, he had to be on the honor roll every month.  That's been fantastic.  Thank you very much.  This is really, really helpful.  Let me just be sure that I ask you.  Did we do everything?  El Dorado is a regular school, not a district. It was a school.  Yeah, and I asked you about the fees.  The nuns.  Yeah, three a month.  Three a month.  Three dollars a month.  Yes.  Perfect. That's fantastic.  And I'm gonna check when I get a chance.  Friday is a mass and a faith formation.  But I may not be able to get to it until next Monday.  No, don't worry. Don't worry. It's okay.  I'll ask if I can find out what this EQ means.  And also I'm going to check my transcript to see if I took music in there.  Yes, and also, do you mind checking if you also have the label EQ in your transcripts?  If it's on my transcript?  Yes, just to understand.  I will.  Just to see if it was a regular standard thing that you do,  or it was something different that they were doing, some special page.  I will do that.  Thank you, thank you very much.  I'll get Sue Town, you know Sue.  Yes, you know her, get ahold of him now.  She has to let me, I got his email.  Sue Town has to let you into the room  where they have the transcripts.  I can't go in there on my own.  She'll let me in.  Yeah, no, she was very nice.  So what I was telling you is that I found this relative  that, because the school was a little bit perplexed,  and I said,  look, it will be really, really important for me to know about his educational background.  And I was able to get the transcripts from Berkeley.  Because you knew the relative?  Yeah, so through the relative, Sue called the relative, his name, he lives in Lodi.  Oh!  Yeah, and so it's a very faraway connection, but he's receiving the royalties of the book,  which means he's the closest relative alive.  Yeah.  And so they talk on the phone and say, sure, I met Ivano, please authorize...  Well, you live here, don't you? You get royalties, too?  Well, first I need to write a book.  Yeah, first you need to write the book.  But, what's his name, by the way?  So, Paul... Paul Heaney.  Paul who?  Paul Heaney.  It's H-E-A-N-E-Y, I think.  Yes.  Paul Heaney.  Heaney.  Heaney. Heaney?  Sounds German, huh?  Yeah, because the way it is related, it's a complicated story.  How did you ever find him?  So, I tried to reconstruct the genealogy of the family.  So, Montague's mother, Lorraine, was the seventh, the last one of seven sisters.  Wow! the last one of seven sisters. Wow. So, she and her sister, Loretta, were twins.  So the last two sisters were twins.  So, she got married last.  But the second sister got married earlier,  and she had only one daughter, Helen. Helen had three children,  one daughter and two boys. Unfortunately, the daughter Catherine died two years ago.  The boys are still alive. Paul is the husband of Catherine. So basically, let me see, Catherine, Richard's mother was Catherine's aunt.  Ah, okay.  So Catherine and, sorry, Richard's mother and Helen's mother were sisters. So Helen, Lorraine was Helen's, Ellen was Lorraine's, how do you say, the daughter of your sister is your...  The daughter of your sister...  What are you for the daughter of your sister?  Would be a niece.  A niece, exactly. So Ellen was Montague's mother's niece. Ellen had a daughter, Catherine, the one that died three years ago.  So she would be the daughter of the niece.  And she's the one that married Paul.  Paul is alive.  He kept everything, because Catherine  was the one that preserved all the pictures of the family,  including these beautiful pictures of the Lorraine,  last name was Lorraine McKay.  They were Irish.  And they moved to Lompoc in the late 1890s  when Lompoc was created.  They were the pioneers.  They went together when the city was created.  So they went there, they bought the land,  they built the house, and their McKay house still exists  because it was one of the fanciest houses.  So this couple, this woman, I have this picture  of the grandmother.  You see the strong woman already from the picture, the dominating figure.  The father died earlier, she took care of the six, seven daughters.  And she was really, I think the daughters took from her.  Because I discovered that the grandmother was a good business woman.  She managed the land that they had, she managed the property.  And Lorraine, although she was officially a housewife,  and Lorraine Monti, whose mother, the same.  She was officially a housewife.  But I have letters that show that she was giving  business suggestions to her son.  Buy this, do this, we can help you with it.  So I think that's where the family comes from,  the mother's family.  And by reconstructing, I was able to see  who's alive, who's not.  And I found this guy, Paul Heaney,  and said, well, let me try to write it.  And he wrote me back.  Isn't that great?  So I went to visit him, and it was very nice.  He showed me the pictures, and finally I  saw a picture of Montague's mother when she was young.  And there could also be, because it's a big family  picture, all the sisters with their husband, although I'm not 100% sure, there could also be Montague's father, the only  picture of Montague's father that I have.  What did the father do, do you know?  Yes.  So the father started, they got married in 1915, and at that time he was working for  the telephone company in Lompoc.

SPEAKER_01: 0:54:20-0:54:21
 Oh, okay.

SPEAKER_00: 0:54:21-1:00:43
 When they moved to Stockholm, it's because the Pacific Telephone and Telegram company in  Stockholm moved them to Stockholm.  So from 1927 until when he retired in 1948 he worked for Pacific Telegram and progressively  went from being a lineman to an installer and then a foreman. And so, I checked the last census available,  the 1940 census, and it shows that at that time in 1940,  they were living in, I think they were still living south.  The last year they were living in,  what was the name of the street?  Oh, Hunter.  Hunter, Hunter.  So he was making twice as much as everybody else in the street  $1,500 a year. Which you know in comparison to the other one like 700, 750.  So it means that you know it was a good job. You had to reach some level of seniority.  So yeah. I was all able to reconstruct that too.  It's ironic how Richard ended up being killed like that.  I know.  And what is surprising, what I always keep thinking, is like, look how much he had achieved  in such a short life.  What would have happened, because he died when he was 40.  Only 40?  And so only 40 he managed to become a businessman.  So he had a fortune.  And by the way, I also discovered what happened to his fortune.  It's kind of a sad story.  Paul helped me reconstruct.  So what happened is that Richard died.  He was 40.  He left everything to his parents.  They were still alive at that time.  They were old in the early 80s, but they were still alive.  The father was already a little bit sick.  He died one and a half year after.  So Richard died in 1971.  By mid-1973, the father died.  Now the mother is the only one.  She inherits everything.  She inherits a fortune.  I mean, Richard had a house on Mulholland Drive,  which one of the fences.  That's right.  Plus all the books he wrote.  Yeah, and not just that. Like, you know, the house existed until 2010.  I went to check the records.  In 2010, that house was bought for $4 million, destroyed completely to build an $8 million  mansion.  That's what they do these days.  Because it was in a fantastic location.  It was a cul-de-sac, nothing around it.  So on the canyon.  So at that time, when Richard died in 1971, the value of the house was around $100,000.  Was he living in the house when he was murdered?  $100,000 in 1971.  It was a lot of money.  And so he had stock market investments.  He had cash, and he had another house, a smaller  house, and that's the one that he left to his father.  And so that's only in 10 years, sorry, in 40 years of life, he had managed to become  wealthy.  Very wealthy.  And he was also the best paid professor at UCLA.  Although he was only 40, they were professors in their 60s.  He was the highest ranked, the one with the best pay.  And he created a wide field of study  in the last three years of his life.  He had these ideas, he wrote three papers  that were very, very important, and here it is.  So imagine how much else he could have produced.  What happened to the money, didn't she get it?  So, it looks like the mother is left alone.  She's gonna live for two more years.  The doctor took care of her husband and started taking her out.  And Paul remembers that.  So, we're talking about 1974.  The husband died in 1973. So Paul's wife and Paul's wife's mother were living together here.  They would call Lorraine, Montague's mother, in Los Angeles.  And sometimes they would go and visit her because she was left alone.  So Lorraine went down there and lived in that house you're after?  Yes. The parents actually moved.  Oh, they did go down there. In's right. They had an apartment complex. They were living in an apartment and  managing the remaining. Oh, there was also that property, right? They owned an  apartment complex in San Fernando Valley. So that's another thing that she inherited.  Oh. So she inherited a fortune. When her husband died, his daughter kept taking her out. And Paul remembered... The husband's daughter?  No, no.  The doctor that took care of Lorraine's husband.  Oh, the doctor's daughter.  Already when the husband was doing poorly, he was like, you know, pay attention to her.  Yeah.  Then the husband died and he started taking her to theater,, dinners and so on. And Paul remembered that on the phone  that Denise was talking to the aunt in Los Angeles  and after the conversation, remember what he said,  what's happening to Aunt Lorraine?  She tells me, I'm in love, I'm in love, I'm in love.  Yes, so you can imagine what happened.  By the time she died, and by the way,  the doctor said that she needed some surgery. And it's unclear that she really needed surgery. At a certain point she was  doing poorly at the hospital. The niece and the niece's daughter went to see her and the  doctor prevented her from seeing her. They had to hire a lawyer to be allowed to see  her. And then one week later she died. When they opened the wheel, try to guess what happened.  She left it all to him.  And then he went to Canada.  He went where?  Canada.  Oh.  So there was a lawsuit going on for like years and years.  In the end they got some of the money, but most of the money,  I mean she was declared able to, I would say like, when somebody's, you know, of the money, but most of the money... I mean, she was declared able to...  I would say, like, when somebody is...  You know, when the mind works.  Sure.  So...  With a sound mind and body.  So she signed documents in which she moved the property.  She thought she loved him?  Jamie, I gotta stand up.  Go ahead, stand up, walk around.  So...  You can't sit too long.  I mean, I honestly... I only hope that at least she was happy.  Yeah, I hope her last days were happy.  What a shame.  No, in fact, I had...  You know, Ivano, I've read the titles...  I've read the titles of his books.  I don't even understand the titles of his books.  Oh, I mean, it's...

SPEAKER_01: 1:00:43-1:00:44
 You're so...

SPEAKER_00: 1:00:44-1:02:50
 No, those papers, I mean, it's really hard for me, too,  to read his stuff in general.  No, I...  I'll be willing to bet he didn't even have  to work for those grades.  Probably.  Also, like, something that probably helped him very much  is that it looks like he had an amazing memory.  Oh, yeah.  And so that really helps you  because you can easily memorize things.  Sure, it does.  You read and you have it in your mind.  Like, for example, Ed, I'd say Barakat.  He was telling me this anecdote of like,  so there was this once a month there were meetings,  I guess school meetings.  School meetings, assemblies.  Assemblies.  So and Richard would be the one playing the piano,  entertaining.  So he was playing classical music.  At a certain point, some of them went around to him.  Richie, can you play some, what's it called, boogie?  Boogie woogie?  Boogie woogie.  Boogie woogie.  And he looked at them, he smiled,  and he said, Ivan, without any problem,  without any, like I would say, any music,  Yeah, no music.  He start playing by ear, and it was wonderful.  So the people, you know, he later, when he went to graduate school in Berkeley,  for all six years he was in Berkeley, he always had a job as an organist and choir director in the main congregation in the Bay Area.  And I know, I found the records of how much he was paid.  He was paid more than as a graduate student, so he had two jobs.  And so I found the son of one of the pastors that hired him, and he said, you know, Richard  was amazing.  He would never read music.  He would not have anything in front of him.  He would just know like...  What a loss that was to the world.  I know, I know, I know.  What time are you meeting with Mary?  At four.  You'll get information because they were in his class.  Yeah, I know, I'm totally looking forward.  I wish my sister were here.  This was really fantastic because you have a great teacher.  She's a great teacher.  She's a great teacher.  She's a great teacher.  She's a great teacher. She's a great teacher. She's a great teacher. She's a great teacher. She's a great teacher. What time are you meeting with Mary? At four. You'll get information because they were in his class.  Yeah, I'm totally looking forward to it.  This was really fantastic because you have a knowledge of St. Mary that nobody else has.  Well, I've been there for 49 years.  Congratulations.  49.  I'm shooting for 50 and then I'm going to say sayonara.  I don't need to be there to shoot.  Do you believe her?  Do you believe that she's going to go 50 and then she says goodbye? Oh yeah. No, I don't need the air-chip. You believe her? You believe that she's going to go 50 and then she says goodbye?  Oh yeah.  I don't.  I think 50 is enough.

SPEAKER_01: 1:02:50-1:02:52
 I hope so, though. It keeps her out of my hair.

SPEAKER_00: 1:02:54-1:05:00
 It was so good to see you.  Thank you very much.  Congratulations.  You got Chief Mentee in August.  In a few days, actually.  Enjoy the tree.  Oh yeah, your brother lives over there.  Enjoy it.  You know what, my brother said he could live there,  could never live here, with his Social Security and a little pension.  He could never make it here, but he can make it anywhere.  And so those areas are still affordable.  His rent is very, very reasonable.  And the quality of life is still very good.  Yes.  We're so relieved that we paid about our brother, he made a fortune yesterday. very very reasonable. And the quality of life is still very good. Yes.  He told me that he made a fortune.  Oh yeah, he was a very successful lawyer.  He went through two marriages.  Two marriages, two divorces.  They cleaned him out.  They cleaned him out.  That's the moment.  He made a lot of money.  Both me and my son say,  the living in Italy is slow, nobody rushes, you know, no traffic jams.  Oh, and also like in those areas in particular, the other beautiful things that you don't...  Hey, are you a good sport?  Sorry?  Are you a good sport?  Sure.  Do you know why time goes by so fast in Italy?  Oh, hell.  Maybe 10 years from now you'll see a day go. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha One is to have a full draft ready by the end of the year or beginning of next year. So that by next year we can publish it.  And enjoy your trip to Italy in December.  And drive up or fly?  Fly.  You can fly.  He stays down.  See, we never go downtown.  Well, but actually one thing that I discovered is that that hotel, the waterfront.  Waterfront, yeah.  It's very quiet.  Oh, that's nice.  Yeah.  Because I tried some other hotels there, like the Best Western, there was his own one, and they had like,  very noisy.  You have to be careful you don't get shot.  Yeah, the Hilton is a bit, it should be quiet too.  I think they're like, that area,  my park right next to it, I never walk around.  I just drive around.  But as they told me, in particular,  they told me if you go farther south,

SPEAKER_01: 1:05:00-1:05:01
 Stop, it is there.

SPEAKER_00: 1:05:01-1:05:31
 I know.  Don't go farther south.  No, no, no, no.  Only once I went to see the house, but it was in the middle of the day. I stayed in the car. I lost control.  Good idea because every time you open the paper somebody got shot. No, no. It's terrible.  Have a safe trip home. Thank you. Have a wonderful trip. I'll be in touch.  Thank you very much. I'll definitely email you before we go.  Okay, thank you. I really appreciate it. Have a good one.  You too.  I'll be there because you're nice.  Yes.  Probably cold.  Bye now.  Bye bye.

