SF: 0:00:01-0:00:10
Did you also look at what I said in my memorial lecture for Thursday?

AF: 0:00:10-0:00:12
No, I didn't.
Is that written?

SF: 0:00:12-0:00:12
Yep.

AF: 0:00:12-0:00:15
Oh, yeah.
Where's that?

SF:
I have it.

AF: 0:00:16-0:00:57
I don't have it with my stuff.
Yeah, I should look at that.

SF:
And I think the thing I started to write for Kreisel about what I call Apprenticeship of a Logician has some things there about before Kreisel came on the scene.
So, how I looked at things.

AF:
When you And then you didn't write that thing.

SF:
No, I never finished writing.

AF:
Yeah, right.
But the beginnings of that thing.

SF: 0:00:58-0:01:40
Yeah, yeah.

AF:
Well, give me those two things.

Now the only thing I feel is missing is some more concrete translation of this for somebody totally ignorant of what's going on.
I mean, I don't know what's going on, but I have a feel for it. Somebody who knows from nothing about what mathematical logic deals with, what symbolic logic deals with.
How do I explain that?

SF: 0:01:42-0:01:56
I always talk about this.

AF:
I know.

SF:
I don't want to start in all over again.

AF:
Yeah.

SF:
That's a different thing from style impact.

AF: 0:01:56-0:02:10
Sure, sure.
But style, so but the only concrete thing that I have is that he would come in and put one letter on the board and expand from that.

SF: 0:02:11-0:02:15
Well, it's better to say you could see it sort of flowering in front of you.

AF: 0:02:15-0:02:20
Yeah, you could see the flower unfolding.

SF:
Yeah.

AF:
Flower opening up.


SF: 0:02:22-0:02:24
Yeah.
And just how we revealed it.

AF: 0:02:25-0:03:16
Yeah.
Petal by petal.

SF:
Yeah.

AF:
Okay, well give me those things, and also give me your introduction to logic.
That's his simplest book, right?
Do I have that over on my shelf?

SF: 0:03:16-0:03:27
Yeah, yeah.
You have both his and Jan's–

AF:
–more recent book.

SF:
I don't know, looking at it again, I don't know.

AF: 0:03:28-0:03:29
It's going to help me in it.

SF: 0:03:29-0:03:29
Yeah.

AF: 0:03:35-0:03:37
Even the first page or the introduction?

SF: 0:03:37-0:03:45
Actually, I just got something from Greg Moore for this Encyclopedia Philosophy.

AF:
Yeah.

SF:
About early twentieth century logic.

AF: 0:03:45-0:03:46
How's that?

SF: 0:03:47-0:03:58
That's pretty good, I think.
You might see what you get out of it.

AF:
Okay.
Okay.

SF:
Any mail?

AF: 0:03:59-0:04:00
No.

[RECORDING CUTS]

AF: 0:04:01-0:10:44
We autobiographical in the outside files and text, letters, poodle papers, scholars, recipes, and the like.
What Robert Stephels has called internalized documentation.

Used, as he has described, the usage of such texts in the autobiographic of state informed place as an explosive authentication of our family's cultural, generational and professional data.

But none of these not all of these founds are integrated in the narrative of the red field and are thus unfiltered by common consensus.

Now, I didn't really think about any of this until I actually wrote the first ten.

When I was first proposed about this conflict, I was intrigued by the idea of thinking about my facial character in the context of real biography, of seeing how real life scholars and biographers approach their real life subjects.

The Amadinian character is a historian.

Sort of book was a biography of an elderly black feminist his boundary and decline, which is almost all Black Diamonds in California.

Awesome herself has lived through an era of that has had refound consequences for her and for our predecessors.

She is subconsciously aware that Babylon and an autobiography.

Another chronicles of Suicides and Black and critical commentary on that era of her university.

Here is my characterization of her as a historian or actual historians.

But part of the process of centrally initial civilization writing is to see how far imagination will take me, how close can I get to human reality without having to experience it myself, how effectively I can do that for years and patients.

And I have been more interested in Nama as a person rather than in how she manifests or does manifest the peculiarity of obviously.

There was something to be learned about the character in the consciousness of the pressure approach to modern.

I held seven in the notion that obviously my office the teller and the brake as somebody told in the brake as toll too, presenting someone else's tale.

I was the one telling her tale and there was no auto too.

Forgetting the story, my own history and my writings, let the character speak for herself, show herself to her actions, thoughts, errors and feed.

Some part of myself and Poles Bodies stems from the fact that all effects of writing writing movements, persuade is always on West.

James Wald said, A writer writes how one thing and west must offer her or himself and often the character posted surely as a writer.

And the story is the confuse that leaks in the minds of some readers of this day.

I don't have any trouble explaining myself and my parents why I got out of choice where the disembodied voice is always case as a poem.

Even students hear the disembodied voice in modern fiction, not as the writer or as a character.

Jacob Wright Navy son, his writing presentation of Giger Spot is sometimes taken as a measure of reader's ability to participate.

I don't mind talking about myself, but there are not that many things I'm going to say or can say that I'm worth constrained much more correspondence for writing discussion.

Then too, I am less interested in automotive biology as form than I am in tradition.

Both the formal intention that is automatic and biology are about what made a person where fiction is about the concept of creation of someone.

One is product, the other is process.

One is forever past, the other is always present.

And there are problems I want to do today.

Riversis and other rivals are the problem of the official faction story of the past.

Yet the facts of the American past are such that the role made to trust the historian of national history who burden down the wild hide of police once erratically disturbed the story.

Thus our greatest literature studies black history and writers.

So this is present again now happening and speaking of the now we're giving the experience for all artists and present so much of the series in Africa American letters who revised or automatically.

The attention to the commit biographies that even a school teaching class of by and large the most thorough discussion on Black Life that is again despite all our explained tragedies towards Black and White Life in this country that we have been unable to legitimately dispose ourselves of the idea that no white person can truly see the action of a black person.

And truly white people are unable to dispose themselves of the notion that a black person in this country cannot have truth about able, that able must always come under the observation of white person.

So the factual moral of that story is less credible, less feel, less of a lengthy than the imagination.

The balance between the representations of the fact that the president at Europe has expressed the fictional service now weir as well as we have come under infectious magnetism from the violence to such an extent that the country is just by the call shows and certainly that is one.

We're not really going to hear all that old stuff anymore.

And truly, it makes very little difference that runs the future is one sound fast.

So Alice Road now.

She has come to the same world, age of economic data, international, and she speaks to anything and she is going to be not by the talent of her all my history.

default: 0:11:07-0:11:09
A couple of administrative pieces.

AF: 0:11:09-0:11:29
We did get chastised by the Code for leaving a bit too many taper cups aside.

So if you could continue to help us by throwing that just away, that would be great.

And at the end of this session promptly as well, we will have another break until one thirty for the next session.

SF: 0:11:30-0:11:38
Our first session today will be chaired by the professor of AfricanAmerican studies at Harvard University, andre Atius.

AF: 0:11:46-0:46:49
One more is my saying more stuff, is that we now have stuff that all dialogues hired by or back to be by the past being by put your name in the dress on that.

There's a certain nation that forget the name because the names are on the list extra people that we're popular and work on the well.

Get my favorite ideas right now.

I'd like to add to my status council.

And I'd like to begin by these processes in the order which they speak tonight.

University and the former director of Safe Attorney.

Established is the professor William Kennedy has a philosophy of Antex and Phil Minister one final professor of the National Book Award and National Cuban Circle.

He's currently writing the biography of Constant Circuit Harrison which was published in nineteen ninety five so this will prove In addition to the work of the authors than this brand for the authors of writing Queen Literally writers and never saved lives.

The last five years we've been working on The Northern Book of Women's Life one and so we will be using some gift in this case and Ray Sergeant who programs what happens what you're really a historian or a literary scholar and if you're really interested in his read film video studies and the Eatrest Carrently Fish book and Aristi's memorial Emperor memory This is early days in the work on the biography of Billy Cinton.

I'm going to instead a picture in some of you picking now that I have the presence of mind in the parts of audience talk about the series fewer than I was so much and I didn't even think about the possibility of preparing slides yesterday slides I thought how fabulously full of information visual only next time but anyway here's a photograph that and if you can tell which is really nicknamed then you're a better eyeballer than look that made.

For the past year I've been collecting information for an alien really fitness and jazz musicians who have successfully as a man for fifty years throughout a successful career in the entertainment business and in the context of several successful marriages.

Female sex was discovered postmortem by colleagues of wives alike.

I find that the materials I've collected about my subject raise a number of ethical questions that seem highly relevant to put on the agenda of this morning evening.

Questions I want to explore during the next twenty minutes are these first suppose the biographer knows the subject's wishes in the matter of disclosure detailed from the subject described.

Is the biographer ethically obliged to expect those wishes?

And second, I have written permission from three of the five known me to discuss their private securities.

What are my ethical obligations for example knowing what I do about the difference between my interest and their expectations?

Let me briefly characterize the two of the worthy.

Salient facts about Dorothy Dorothy Kippin can be summarized very quickly.

At age seventeen, Dorothy Kippin began prospreing in order to get a job with a jazz man in a small Midwest city.

She cut her hair, bound her breast down with corn sheets, put on man's clothes and rechristened herself Dylan, which was her father's name and her brother's name.

The customers in the club were to claim didn't know that the guy wrote saxophone was that a girl, but the other band members did.

This was nineteen thirty one, fresh.

Everybody needed a job.

Yes, released white members.

Then when she was about twenty one, Kift went on the road.

While she stayed in touch with her brother and her cousins, she came to her story.

For everybody else, for the rest of her life, she named Billy Billy.

Kison established himself as a leader of trio and traveled constantly, Kansas City, Jockwood, New Orleans, Amarillo, Santa Barbara, Portland, Seattle, and finally Spokane, Washington, where he and eventually he took over a booking agent in the South Sport United.

During his twelve years of nineteen thirty mission between nineteen thirty five and nineteen fifty five, he appears to have been made at least four successive common law marriages, but after settling in Spokane, he legally married or so she thought, he legally married a tipper, who met in the night of thirty three.

She quit the business, and they adopted three children who became political community, active members of the PDA and Boy Scouts, Garden Clark.

Everybody, band members, clients, wives, and sons, were amazed to discover only after kids was dead and kids were spot.

One of his son put it in a key and you'll always be dead.

Including three of the lives, I have not found cause to doubt their place that they have.

Now if there was ever a person to be done, Tipson liberally made a career of it, and it is always published in light, even about things that don't seem very important, and would have been easy for a journalist to pick out what he did somewhere like.

And if there was one thing Hickman never wanted anybody while he was alive, was his father.

And those living with him finding acknowledged having seen disability in Southern T shirt and Johnny shorts were restricted to surgical bandages around his chest for the protective covering Japanese.

And he always claimed to the people that he had been in a terrible car accident and crushed his shoulder and his ring, and therefore had to wear his body of the ring with his hat and they covered over together the damage that there.

Now that meant a couple of things, one of them is that feeling of the body was very flushed, and also that kitchen has taken as a kind of shield so that lightened them touch them with a very intensive About three weeks ago, with the help of Kitty Oak, the latter guidance now premarin, her name was the executive of his will, so she is my source of position to adopt.

About three weeks ago as well, I received a precious copy of the one site of information that provides this information.

The pathologist report been on hopes for forty eight hours after written with the knowledge that his intervention is successful my thoughts.

The four K single space report is full answers to my first the exterior features of the body on the internal organs, including the ending, and finally a microscopic examination.

Clinical precision is a knowledge of sense, not disguise.

Like me, we want to know what exit's choice of selfrepresentation, a biologically motivation in answers preserving my weakness, I will not know the paradologist and I found out that I intended to pitchuate the information and a set of questions that no generation of biologists prior to that scientifically.

A question explored by biologists and shirling around the first would boil down to the question, how many tests are there anyway?

That's what we're going to get up.

Let me return to the ethical question I must raise finding the author of divorce.

Billy Tippen left Brooklyn and his divorce wife Kitty as an exemptor, but in it's closed after the truth.

Tippen's cousins believe that Nora Lee and Philly most assuredly wished to avoid this disclosure of her biological death.

Apparently Nora Lee made occasional dinner meet each other and requested assurances from both of them that if she calls they would come to her deathbed and protect her from exposure.

Dorothy particularly with her children never knew who she really was.

Kiffin had a laboring climate eventually died from emphema and leave ulcers yet never made.

Does she know how close to death she was?

Or did he really wish to make flashes yet?

I would argue that as Hippen's biographer, if I should ever find a document in the west way, not to have any of the details of her in his life disclosed, information about her body cover and animal relationship that the art can carry out instructions to figure out where they fit into the puzzle of the parents and into the social conditions that made possible life sensible to raise.

This is my view.

The dead cannot have decisions.

They can only have will, and the will delegate responsibility for making decisions.

Real ethical concepts are increasing, and claiming to know what the dead would have wanted is usually a self serving toy that decision persuading partners.

That's what Hicken's attitude might have been toward living any materials whatsoever.

It's a meaningless question, because the dead cannot be asked such as.

And though the dead cannot be consulted, they also cannot be shamed or in any way hurt by disclosures about what happened.

Figuring out Billy History is a lot fun, and at this point what I'm able to figure out was the great deal below and precious knowledge of discussion.

It's a pleasure to acknowledge the public on the page to support Garbert's book Death in Cross Friends and Cultural Anxiety has been shaping my question and this question I brought to interesting positive.

In fact, Garber uses the chicken story in the interest as a leading example of progress narrative.

But Garber positioned the progress narrative to progress about to have been compelled by social and economic forces to disguise himself.

That is, he embraces transcendism unwillingly as an instrumental strategy rather than an embodied pleasure in place.

Darber makes a short account of the range of normalizing people's explanations offered after Hitlin's death by the survivor.

For example, Darber noted that the news stories based on interviews never contain any mention of human sexuality.

Darber remarked that quote The common answer to why people cross dress has been the assumption that the crossdresser must be gay, but as that study suggests, the majority of art straight or bisexual or marriage.

The question of what was in it, sexual experience is certainly one that I wanted to explore in my book.

My working hypothesis right now encountered in the jazz room for the example of Joan Butch, and recently with this lesbian model who caused me to be on the focus on focus and I concerned about mathematics.

Gifton, I take place, has only respectfully desired and attracted man.

Therefore, only by passing as a man was that will then attract him, could Gifton back up his own desired.

Two sources I have found especially useful to gain extension on this period were his Lilia Soderman's Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers in Left Lincoln First Century America, Olyspia Henry and Adelaide Davis Boost and Sleather.

Her story told in Firstwood by Leslie Feinberg's novel for Boost Root, Mary August.

The excitement I feel about the Science Plus is not share mind is not even known to people who have most members of millions of families and three of people also generous in sharing the memories, photographs and documents that we have my book made.

So that brings me to my second question and what I want to raise professional, namely, what are my technical obligations knowing what I do about the difference between myself.

Particularly significant in this regard was I found recording these faults and they are all have been extremely generous and more incompetent about the nature of their initial life.

I think the day was extremely clean, partly because they had omission holds out and privatized previously and their stories listed by both certain.

They were all unhappy about the outcome, in which what they remembered as wrong and feeling just the only story.

I think they regarded the interview as a way of well.

And yet I, like everybody else in the world, no doubt, have somewhere in my mind a gloomy memory of reading a little book by Janet Melon, titled The Journalist Murder.

You will no doubt recall this is an exposaic process by which a young man, Joseph McDonald witnessed the murder of his wife and children produce by the journalist Joe Guinness who provided guests with the material to his dad and soldiers.

Although describes the transaction between journalists and as a dynamic reduction of portrayal, tells how the rapid attention of the journalists invariably produced when the individual reports of an artist.

She comments the disparity between what seems to be the attention of the place and what it actually presents in the always comes as a shock.

For cleverly primed books acknowledges the journalist.

The journalist is a murder, the killer of the childish selfagrandized which we hourly hunger in our family.

Document the general development initiative relationships for matter ever occurred merely to be holding the writer who involved material writer by journalist and the murderer can now be read to overtime articles about women struggles of scholars including biographer class.

It's not conceived the ethical issues raised by biography exactly like those of journalists that are in a fundamental conflict between the Christian arts of the living and curiosity.

So biographer work is working as biographer work is like another professional burglar breaking into a house right through a certain door and then he assists the safe in case he choose money.

Arguing withstanding how easily mundane, but I do think we're responsible to her equation of research effect.

After all, we do ask for legal permission to expand some project, but throughout this project and assuming that the category of what it does is not the same as legal.

Nonetheless, my argument draws draws to reflect upon anticipating questions like legal.

And I think legal guidance is especially helpful in the questions of rights crimes.

The US Supreme Court articulated legal contracts of my officer guidance in finding and bill of rights to provide citizens with no grave of crimes again there's no real quarter against but still we know where it is and right the number of privacy protecting relationships was designed to communications in this wellness.

This ruling applies to professional confidentiality, but the principle extends extend to ethical grounds as well.

Citizens give up some of their privacy rights when they end with relationships between figures and cloud life.

But I believe any biographer is ethically obliged to bear a kind of number of privacies providing representation in the case.

On the other hand, I have a higher opinion of biography than I consider biography to be a subject of history, one that has the unique semantic, placing before us, the actuality of an individual life knowledge social and psychological complexity.

So most of the comments document poses great sensible jobs explainable.

I don't want motors to be too long over time.

So let me close with the line I captured from a distinguished English biographer Rome with equal care one tenth that there is everything I need to know about that.

We have to respect the only truth for the outside biography Nobody The Self Life Scander Shollen Salada If you believe the myth of objective fact and objective biography, the self is not supposed to be in biography at all.

Journalists and other positives who choose tend to regard any uncertainty about truth and concern with subjectivity as academic laws.

Of course the truth can be known.

Of course it exists a part of the proceeding felt.

It exists in horizontal nuggets which can be dug up from the surrounding matter, arranged in chronological order and presented in as great numbers as possible.

This is the ideal of one school of biography what I call the objective school.

Another which I call the school of literary biography whether or not the subject of a literary figure tends to see all facts as artifacts and to see context and artisans as copartners of fact.

But this school does not have public speed.

This is not what biology is popularly understood.

The public, as we've seen in various legal decisions, distrust articles and nonfiction and see little difference between arranging and condensing and outright lines.

But what I'm going to talk about is not so much the subjective nature of the biography as the cost to the biographer of that subjectivity.

And since I don't want to implicate anyone else, I will talk about my own case.

My first biography was A Woman of A Life of Virginia Woolf.

This book began with a love of Virginia Woolf's novel and a fascination with the connection between them and her life.

At the time I began the book, amazing is to believe around nineteen seventy, not so much was known about British News life.

I worked with her unedited and unpublished diary, which had recently been acquired by the Burg Collection of the New York Public Library.

I took her feminism seriously, as almost no previous writer had done.

My very simple idea was that being a woman was important to Richard Woolf, and that objective to writing her novel.

For example, my take on Miss Branby of the Lighthouse was different from most previous takes because how I saw her was influenced by what I knew about Wolf's ambiguous feelings towards her mother on moving friends.

I had not really set out to write a biography, but a series of readings of the novel framed by biographical material that would support my arguments.

When people started reading the manuscript, however, they called it My Biography of a Renewal Wolf.

I was surprised to find that what I had been writing was biography, but I immediately decided to additional thing.

I liked the field I had got into so unknowingly.

I could see the advantages, principally at a time when literary criticism in the Academy insisted that attention to anything outside the text itself was illegitimate, Biobricky gave me permission to evoke the context for literary work.

It was as though I had been given a pass go.

I could bypass new criticisms, I could bypass construction, I could bypass theory.

I had no temperamental affinity for the various orthodoxies which have prevailed in English departments for the past twenty five years, and biography was my excuse for avoidance.

Biography in fact saved my professional life.

In return, I was extremely grateful and became a proselytizer for biography, urging other people to use it as a way of doing scholarly work.

As I was writing women's letters, I was unaware of my theme, and I did not, except fithfully, identify with Virginia Woolf.

I only knew that I was writing with certainty and passion.

The work meant something to me, even if I didn't know exactly what.

Later, when the book was being passed, I understood that I could use the work to work out issues that were urgently important to me at that time, issues of autonomy, selfhood, independence, and their relationship to gender.

The book that established my professional viability and identity was itself about identity and viability.

I believe now that identification with my subject provided the motive and the force needed to write the book, which like all projects in the years, required powerful motivation.

I believe now that every biography, in some way, provides psychic food to the biographer, probably by allowing the biographer to flow in and out of the dams that she is suscepting, allowing the biographer in the fancy to appropriate what the susceptic.

By the time Women of Letters was published, I had been divorced for three years after taking marriage.

I was obsessed with marriage as a formative institution.

I decided to write a book about marriage.

Using Victorian writers for my example, because I had been a specialist in the nineteenth century British novel and my head was filled with anecdotal material that I could draw on.

My model was written to achieve evinent victorians, exchanges portraits of individuals in the service of a vision of Victorian culture.

My book was called Parallel Love, and it focused on the marriages of five Victorian writers Carlyle, Ruskin, Nill, George Eliot, and Diddy.

It was meant to suggest the parallels existed between the marriages of my historians and marriages today.

What exactly I left that to you is discussed so, but throughout in my telling of the story of marriages, I emphasize the shifting currents of power between a man and a woman tied by marriage.

That power was an issue in marriage was probably the underlying point of parallel lives.

With this book, I was aware at the time I was writing of the connection to my own life.

Indeed, I congratulated myself on how discreetly I was telling the story of my own marriage and divorce.

I thought frequently of Oscar Wilde's aphorism criticism is the only civilized form of autobiography.

Maybe adjusted it to biography is the only civilized form of autobiography.

If Flaubert said Matt Ann Vauvin same wat, I would say James Carlyle same mois, George Elliot, same wait, Harriet Taylor same, and Charles Dickens same wait.

About that time I started getting asked occasionally to speak on panels like this one about biography.

Often I felt serious in such gatherings.

A little voice inside me said that the kind of biography that I did wasn't real biography.

Real biography went to the Hall of Records in the cemetery, while I went to the library.

Real biography did more interviews than I did.

Real biography discovered that so and so was born in nineteen oh six instead of nineteen oh nineteen oh seven that's true about twelve in nineteen sixty so was hostilizing depressions in the fifties despite public air community or that he couldn't face the day without drinking a half a bottle of chew before due or that he left his wife and family every Sunday night to see when that happened whereas Aunt merely found new content.

Virginia Woolf in the context of her feminism, Dickens and all in the context of new narrative.

At some point it occurred to me that the little voice inside my head saying You're not a real biographer had to be a cousin of the angel of the house Virginia Woolf Imagines who stood behind women writers saying you can't write an internalization of patriarchal hamstring but this realization didn't help.

Soon after Para Lot was published in nineteen eighty three, I began work on a biography of Josephine Baker, the AfricanAmerican dancer born in St.

Louis in nineteen ninety six, who took Paris by a storm in nineteen twenty five and went on to become the first international Black Superstar.

The idea for this book was born when I saw a travel poster in the Paris metro advertising the boys of New York City by the image of a large black man on a roll estate carrying a portable stereo.

He was not AfricanAmerican, I felt sure, but African sandbelief probably.

And the image, so little likely to compare it as an act of New York in the United States, crystallized for me with mingled pleasure and rue, how much fantasy there was in the French fascination with American black.

My book about Jen C Baker was to be as much about the racial ideology that lay behind and prepared for her client in Europe's twenties, both the enthusiastic primitivism and the protonazi racism, as it was about her individual life.

Biography's bias towards the individual life increasingly oppressed me.

I was more interested in representative lives, lives that resonated because of issues of class, racial and gender.

Josephine Baker gave me a chance to talk about the way France had functioned as a place of escape for African Americans and the way the French in turn had mythologized Black American experience.

I had used biography as a cover for literary criticism in the Virginia Woolf book.

Now I was using it as a cover for cultural history.

My material in this book is radically different from the material I used to write about Virginia Woolf or the Victorian.

To me this was part of the appeal of the project.

No diary, no vast minisided correspondence existed for Joseph D.

Baker as former temporary subjects.

Photographs became primary sense, not just for the information engaging about her performances in the packaging in Europe, although I found that fascinating, but also because of the psychological revelation contained in these records of her self presentation.

I spend a great deal of time, for example, looking at and thinking about and writing about pictures of her cross eyed bunnies.

Which seemed to be at the heart of her personality.

I read that gesture as exhaustively as one might read a poem.

I saw this part of a tradition of black comedy that was simultaneously ingratiating and durable.

I saw in it the clamming of kids who have left out the scene and worked their way to popularity.

I saw in it the attempt of someone who was used to being an object of sexual attention to reflect the errotic need of her audience was a hexaffe.

I saw it as part of a strategy of identifying with the aggressor, cocking facement and rages, turning them into a joke, the characteristic gesture of an education, someone who leaves before she can be kicked at, someone who makes faces before faces can be made at her.

I said that in every book, for me, there is personal involvement, some kind of psychic nurture, the nature of which is sometimes not clear until after the book is finished, sometimes long after.

But even now, I find it difficult to say explaining what was at a deep level in it for me in writing that's not because I don't know or at least suspect, but because I find it so embarrassing.

I'll say it elusively.

I wanted to prove and be explored by other freedom.

On what level the assertion of freedom is clear in the very choice of Jessie B.

Baker after literary figures like Pugene Wolf and Dickens.

In writing about Baker, I can say, I don't want to be categorized.

I want to prove that I can write about other than literary figures.

But the freedom I wanted to explore was more specifically a sexual freedom.

At the deepest level, Baker appealed to me because she seems, in a dated phrase I can't seem to improve on, a liberated woman.

If Woman of Letters is a book of my twenties, it has been.

