AF: 0:00:01-0:05:34
Spend a lot of time with Tarski at a certain point?

WV:
I guess I didn't her that too well.
I spend a lot of time-?

AF:
-with Tarski at a certain period in your life?

WV:
No, that's not that true.
I took a course from him for one semester.
And then I started another one.
The first course was set theory, axiomatic set theory.

AF:
When give me a year what year was that?

WV:
That was nineteen fifty two, the fall of fifty two.
That semester.

AF:
Okay.
Were you a philosophy student?

WV:
Yes, I was.

AF:
Okay.
Yeah.
So you were there in 'fifty two?

WV:
1952.

AF:
So then you were there when my husband was there?

WV:
That could be.

AF:
Yeah, right.
He might have been the TA in the course.

WV:
Okay.

Montague.

Right.

Right, yeah.

Was Mates in that sitting in that Kalish did.

Kalish was there.

Uh huh.

Okay.

Okay.

And then the next term, I'm trying to think I could check my notes because I took the second and the second semester, I was drafted in the middle of the term.

I don't think I took the second term at all.

And I was drafted into the army.

Uh huh.

Just like that's what happened to us.

Okay.

twenty one months later.

Uh huh.

Well it was the no think to be the first semester in ' fifty five, that is to say February.

And I think it was then or shortly thereafter that I signed up for the article course in geometry and geometry.

And what happened was I took the preliminary philosophy and I failed the history of philosophy exam so I was sort of forced to drop the RT course to sign up for a couple of courses in history and philosophy one on Constant one on it was a disappointment to me.

Who were you doing your dissertation with Benjamin?

So he was your advisor?

Yeah, okay.

So what the other thing John said is that you knew about the Dorothy Wolf affair.

Yes.

Well I can say one other thing maybe he's longer on course.

Okay somewhat later this is this number of years later I began auditing a course that Tarki gave again an actionatic accessory and I took notes on that.

But anyway yes So did you leave sorry, did you leave Berkeley at a certain did you go away and come back or you were I left in fifty in the fall of fifty eight at that point I see.

But I had left I get it.

I got a small fellowship in Germany and I got married and I just left.

Uhhuh I see it.

My wife so she's home.

Okay.

So we went to Europe stayed eighteen months actually.

Only about eight months where I get there Mhm.

And when we came back we came out to after a few months we came out to Berkeley just for summer.

I see and that was in the nineteen ninety six nineteen sixty I see.

So the nineteen sixty Yeah, so were you looking at my daughter reading for my dad John did at?

Okay and I did take down a date when Dorothy invited my wife to meet over to welcome their place where she was in On Michigan Avenue and we had dinner there So how did you know Dorothy?

Ah and so tell me everything you know about how this got how their affair The reason this is interesting is that it was the affair with Dorothy that precipitated Maria's moving out.

I mean, Tarski had other affairs had had other affairs and this as I see it was happening.

Yeah, well it began what little I know about it it began when she was working on she was a secretary in the department, right?

SPEAKER_01: 0:05:34-0:05:35
That's what I saw.

SPEAKER_00: 0:05:35-0:19:58
Yeah, and she was working on the conference, I think a model theory conference in fact and had a lot of dealings with him and that as I reconstructed is when the affair must have begun.

And by nineteen fifty nine, one other thing that I know is that the Scott Dana arrived with his new wife and brought her to meet Tarski.

And about that time Maria was showing Dorothy various things in the house about how to run the house and Irene Scott assumed that Dorothy was somebody was household help and only later learned that she was the new DwyN.

But anyway, so Dorothy invited you to dinner?

Yes.

And well the way I might put it that I was a little awed by Tarski, I guess.

And you and the rest of the world I used well there were various stories I heard about him.

I could tell you some other things about things that Native Scott and Hermonique said about him not exactly the words I just thought but what I was going to say is that people would come up with something and people would say half joking.

He's the smartest man in the world.

So it was very impressive.

Yeah I don't know it just has to do with my own personality I suppose but I don't think it was a very interesting evening for anybody.

Too intimidated there was a great man Why did Dorothy say she liked?

Did Dorothy talk to you about him?

No Why did she invite you, do you think?

Why did she invite you to dinner?

We parted on good terms my affair with her let's see would have lasted from sometime shortly after I arrived here Split Yeah Okay.

So about that particular evening you don't really remember very much except that you were invited.

That's it and there were just the four.

Just the four Uhuh and I don't think I carried on a birthday conversation or anything like that.

It was sort of a very uneventful Can you remember whether Tarsky seemed happy or pleased or yeah just ordinary nothing Yeah and did she ever talk to you about him though?

Dorothy?

I hadn't when we came back from from Europe I think I had her address and her phone number but I don't know maybe I can you know I just were you surprised that she was involved with him?

Yeah I was surprised.

Mmhmm But I don't know somebody else made some kind of a remark that roughly to the effect that she always wanted to sort of be with people who were smart.

She'd really much gone as far as she could in that direction the jackpot or whatever know really how what the words were something to the effect that she had the tendency to be attracted to smart people and that she really succeeded With that one.

It was she really landed she landed a big one huh?

In a way it wasn't terribly maybe utterly surprising but it was well big difference in their age for one.

What did she look like Dorothy at the time?

Would you say looking for pictures of her?

But I couldn't find her.

She was thin and dark with long hair and not unattractive but not extremely beautiful I thought she was attractive.

You thought attractive yeah Was she lively a lively person or Rather Was she would you say she herself was extremely intelligent, smart, whatever you want to smart She had been a teaching apprentice in philosophy at one time Okay she was married to Maurice Wolf and their marriage already of course was not sort of falling apart and I got to know him too So when you had your affair she was married to married huh To Maurice Wolf Yeah right okay Later Toky and I saw something of Maurice his second wife but we lost touch with them It really wasn't our fault they moved away somewhat and we were down near Monterey Semplace So we knew that well we saw them several times More recently wide Yeah right But they were outside No I'm more interested in well I actually spoke to I spoke to Dorothy briefly?

I do I don't know you don't have to tell me No I do No she's completely lost touch with her She married somebody came by some years after that and she was with a man not some brilliant academic somebody else and he seemed like a nice nice person and they were going to go by both down the panamode They did it, they did it.

I learned a fair amount about Dorothy from Madeline Smith who was a secretary in the department who worked under Dorothy and then went to work at the Lawrence Lab.

And she'd been in touch with Dorothy all along.

And so when I talked to Dorothy, Dorothy was had just come from Washington to be with her mother I think who maybe was ill, but her then husband was also dying and he has since died.

But they did sail Yeah, and so she lived in So this must be finished but I've still got this other thing that's recording so I'll hope that's picking up Yeah, let me I'm going to do some well no I guess that's not going to work No what I thought I would do is call no this is going to work I think so we'll just keep talking and I'll give you Dorothy's phone number at the end.

But maybe wait I'm going to try calling I'll tell you what happened.

So when I spoke to her then she was reluctant to talk just in general about this even though it's as long ago as it was and her understanding I mean part of what she said was, well why would anybody want to write about Tarski anyhow?

Okay well you can understand why anyone would want to write and then why should this be in there in any case?

And I would explain that although I guess I don't know if I exactly said that to her, but to my mind it's particularly interesting not because she's one of a series of women that he had affairs with, but because it was in effect the thing that made Maria move out and they nearly they came very very close to divorcing.

I mean everybody in fact thought that Maria and Tarski had divorced and but they eventually got back together again.

Also there were trips I've heard from other people there were trips that Dorothy took with visitors along with Maria.

They took a trip all together.

Did you know this?

Somebody came from Poland to visit and Maria and Dorothy and Causky and the Borsuks all took a trip way down to Mexico etcetera.

So Causky always was in remained in contact I can't exactly say friends, but he remained close to Maria even during their separation.

But Dorothy didn't want to talk about this then, but she was troubled because of her husband being ill, et cetera.

So then I called just recently and she now lives in Walnut Creek and I mean I called getting information from Madeline Smith again, who's quite willing to talk.

But she was sick.

She had the flu herself.

Yeah, at that point, this was maybe two months ago, let's say, maybe three months ago.

But I still had the sense she didn't want to talk to me.

Now, I think what I'm going to say to her you learn to play hardball when you're doing what I do.

And what I'm going to say to her is that I've heard a great deal from other people and it's true.

And so she ought to have her version if she wants her she's going to be in there whether she likes it or not.

So if she wants to have her piece to say, this is her chance.

And I think it's the right not only it's the right strategy, morally it's right.

She shouldn't have a chance to say.

So I'm going to try one more time and see how she's feeling.

I hope she's well.

She sounded really pretty bronchitic when I spoke to her on the phone, so I'll see.

But I will look up her number and get it for you.

But first tell me and what I may want to do is hang up and get it and call you back because I may want to check to see how this recording is going.

So that'll give me a chance to do that.

Okay.

But will you tell me those stories that Montague and Dana would told you before that before you went to dinner?

Again, you may be sort of disappointed.

It's all very vague.

Okay.

But it was one of the cards that I had I can't remember exactly what it was I might be able to figure out but it's been Mhm.

And I think that Veronica Kayleigh there too.

No, they're somebody I've been trying to get in touch with I can't find her attractive married psychiatrist.

Yeah, right, but they're divorced again.

Yeah.

Okay, anyway, I was in an apartment.

And I forget to what it happened because I didn't really see much of either one of them.

Of Dana and Monague, you mean?

But what about Veronica?

Well, I guess I dated her once again.

Uh huh.

But this is when she was with Kalish, I take it.

No, I think she was with They had already broken up by then?

Oh, okay.

Okay.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, he was incredible.

Right.

And that's what he was in that I found it rather well, but if they really were bad not he was quite a terrible person.

And they were really I don't remember the details.

I mean, I can if I could, but I did not really but I do remember that they didn't Oh yeah, but they loved him.

I mean, he was Yeah, he was their Papatarski.

Yeah.

Uh huh.

Yeah.

So this was before you took your course?

Yeah.

You were so you were surprised?

Nothing to contribute I was interested but it made an impression on me.

Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:19:58-0:20:02
I did know that they worked together and of course they admired.

SPEAKER_00: 0:20:02-0:22:22
Well they had a project they had to do.

They had to translate something for him that they hated and then Montague went off to UCLA and Dana was left with it.

And he hated it and dropped it and there was bad blood there was bad blood between Scott and Tarski for a short period of time.

But Montague and Tarski were extremely close and very as far to Montague Tarski was godlike and in all the as Corcoran said, like in the Greek sense of the God, the God who does these awful things, but also the Jew.

So I know a lot about that from well from other people and because we were around at the time, but I thought maybe you had something more specific than that.

But that's yeah.

Yeah.

Well, there was a lot of laughing about it.

I mean, I was what she knew about it.

Yeah, no, she probably was sort of part of the cohort and would because he did things that were laughable.

He would call people up and you'd have to come over.

And I just spoke to Jana recently and he was saying Richard used to say because there was a certain period where everybody was calling him Papa Tarski, both out of respect and also ridicule kind of thing.

And so I was trying to get at who it was that originated that name.

And Dana said, it might have been him, it might have been several, somebody else.

He wasn't going to claim authorship of it.

But he was saying one of the things he said is Richard used to say, Papatarski called me up and said I have to come over and lick stamps.

So that was the metaphor for coming over and doing some of his excuse me, shit work.

Yeah.

But all his students had to do that in varying degrees.

My husband was his student, which is at the same time.

So this is how we knew.

I wanted to ask you one other thing though, and that is, did you have any contact with JCC Mackenzie?

SPEAKER_01: 0:22:22-0:22:23
No, I've heard about him.

SPEAKER_00: 0:22:26-0:23:48
Yeah, because he was there at that time too, and his death was somewhere around nineteen fifty three.

And I don't have the exact date.

Yeah, well, it's one of those suicides it's not absolutely clear.

It was like a lot of sleeping pills and a lot of alcohol and whether it was absolutely designed as a suicide or whether it just happened because it was too much of both things.

But it was in very now were you there when Kalitsky died was in that accident?

Do you remember that?

I guess I heard about it.

No, I bet you weren't there then.

Okay, because those things I was trying to pinpoint I know exactly when Kalitzki died, but McKenzie's death was pretty much about the same time, but I was trying to see if someone knew the exact date.

I mean, I can run it down, but I like to run things down in several directions if I can.

Several people.

Yeah, and that's all the thing is you get a lot of people that tell you the same story, then you begin to get and have a little a little confidence.

Okay.

I don't know if it's true.

Oh yeah, but I like the apocryphal ones.

Oh, you're not going to tell me the Kotex story.

Okay, that one I won't listen to again.

SPEAKER_01: 0:23:48-0:23:50
Doesn't need to be in any biography.

SPEAKER_00: 0:23:50-0:32:27
No, that's going to be in.

That's got to be in.

If that's not in, people will say, Where's the Kotex story?

No, but it is I love collecting stories.

And so if there's any other one that you know, that's Dana Scott's favorite story.

He tells that over and over again.

Yeah, right.

But and it is a wonderful story, but people just occurred to me now.

Okay.

I sort of laugh a lot.

But I don't calculate.

Now I'm not sure Bill Deweller Mhm.

Well, that must have been he must have done it before like in the very early forties when Tarski first came.

Because he couldn't talk.

He couldn't teach didn't teach logic when he first came.

Yeah.

Well, I have a great account from Bjarney Johnson, who was his first student, and who came and who was actually in Berkeley when Tarski came and took an algebra class from him.

So I have a pretty good and knew him then over a good many years.

So I think I got a And I have a pretty good picture of him as a teacher of whatever he taught.

So I think I won't run that one down.

But there was something else that went So you've returned to Berkeley to live, is that it?

Or did you never leave?

No.

We came back from Europe.

Because I thought that Corcoran said that he took a course from you at Johns Hopkins.

Exactly.

Yeah.

We always sort of wanted to be here.

We loved Berkeley.

That's sort of the story of how we ended up here.

They sacrificed very easily.

But so we came out in that summer just for the summer, but in the meantime I had just happened by chance we were sort of out of money and we didn't really know what we were going to be doing.

But I ran into somebody I knew before Kathy Price.

Right.

I took a course from him.

He said when he learns that I didn't have his job whether I wanted to teach a job.

I see position was open.

So I signed and so I interviewed for it and gave me the job and I taught there two years in like Baltimore at all and I wasn't doing much of my education.

It wasn't terribly happy affair there that I as far as I was there.

You don't need to get all the details I came out to Berkeley each summer and after two years I didn't have my dissertation.

I obviously didn't have my PhD and I was working a lot with graduate students they just couldn't teach me.

So what I did is I took off your I see.

Yeah and my wife Toby was able to get a job, part time job after second during that year and so that she took off.

And so then you came back to Berkeley and you've been there ever since?

I see.

So where are you teaching mathematics?

I was at Stary's College.

At St.

Mary's.

Oh, so you know our colleague Keith Devlin, no doubt.

Keith Devlin who is now a dean at St.

Mary's?

Devlin, DEVLIN.

I don't teach here anymore.

I retire Oh, okay.

Well I was on disability leave I had a condition with my eyes well with cataract but it was diagnosed.

Uh huh.

So I was on disability in between sixty eight Oh yeah well no Keith just came out there.

Retired.

I see.

Okay.

I see.

So you taught at Saint Mary's How interesting Yeah no Devlin came I think just like three years ago.

And I have one very good friend who still teaches there and I sometimes see a few people really through the connection to him and friends who used to teach there were fired because they were good I think at any rate but I really don't get back there at all.

I see.

So I've lost touch with it so I don't have any touch.

Yeah at all.

Oh that's interesting.

Well otherwise we've been here off and on all this time.

I got in my years at St.

Mary's I got one sabbatical leave at least in Paris.

Nice and otherwise and then there were the years that bring Europe or otherwise You've been in Berkeley?

Yeah when I was on disability my wife and I took a year off and we traveled Europe for example Okay Well that's nice.

You live on where is Country He said you lived on Country where is Contra Costa Avenue?

Where is it?

It's in north Berkeley near the corner of Savanno and Yamada I see, yeah, okay.

I know where that is now right.

Not so far from where Tarski lived.

He used to like to go that way that direction instead of going when he went down from his house which was off of spruce, instead of going down in that way that you would think to go anywhere, instead of going that way he would swing around sort of twist around and go to the Alameda and by the circle there swing down Michigan go right, left.

He had a regular little pattern that he would that he insisted by car.

Yeah, he would insist that that was the shortest way to go, which he had it figured out and that was his way of going a way that I never would have thought of going.

And just recently his son still lives in the house on Michigan Avenue and he took we went someplace and he showed me the way Tarski used to go or either he drove no I think I drove, but he showed me how Tarski used to do it, which was that way.

Well listen, I really appreciate this and what I'm going to do is I'm going to hang up and then I'm going to get Dorothy Wolf's number and I'll give it to you but would you wait a little while before you call?

Maybe wait a week or two?

Before I call her Yeah, so let's give me a or what you could do is why don't you wait until I call you and say what's happened?

Is that okay?

No I'm in absolutely no hurry at all.

Is this a surprise that I know Yeah I'm going to talk to her again but we're Toby and I are going to transfer seven weeks at the end of this month.

Yeah, that's what he said.

So maybe call our wait until we get back.

Yeah, right.

Okay.

Yeah, okay.

Well we're actually going away too then we're going to so we'll be back at about the same time.

So do you want the number now or do you want either way?

I'll give it to you now but let me hang up I want to just check and see how this recorded so then I'll have a chance to okay so I'll call you back if that's okay I'll call you back in five or ten minutes.

Good, thanks.

default: 0:32:27-0:32:28
Bye.

SPEAKER_00: 0:32:40-0:34:53
Worked fairly well.

What I did was when I have one of these things that only is digital and only records for fifteen minutes but when that ran out when that ran out I just put my normal tape recorder right next to the speakerphone thing and it seems No that won't work wait Okay which I'm doing again just to see to practice this.

I had this great panasonic that had two cassettes in it and it's gone.

It doesn't work anymore and it had the kind of cassette where I could record and actually take it out.

But on the digitals you can't do that anymore.

Not that I don't know if that probably doesn't interest you at all but recently got a answer machine that is digital.

Yeah, which is great, but you can't remove the cassette in case you want to for recording conversations over the telephone.

If you have a cassette that you can take out then you can play it on something else and transcribe it and do all that junk.

Anyway, her number is all right five one oh nine three nine nine six oh I wanted to ask you one other thing when they were together that evening did Tarski seem wildly attracted to her?

Do you remember that?

I mean just like a normal old couple She didn't live She only lived there for a very short time as I understand it.

She moved out pretty quickly.

Somebody else came on the scene or maybe she didn't like the scene or whatever, but she only stayed there a short time and he was very lonely afterwards and tried to link up with other people.

But it was not a long lasting affair.

Yeah, so but as they say the thing that makes it interesting it was the precipitating moment.

But you liked at the time you knew her, I take it you liked her a lot, huh?

default: 0:34:54-0:34:54
Yes.

SPEAKER_00: 0:34:55-0:37:21
Yeah.

So you could see why he would be attracted to her.

Yeah, yeah.

Well the person I spoke to about her was Madeline Smith.

I don't know if you ever ran into her.

She was a secretary in the math department younger and black, very appealing person and she and Dorothy were great friends.

And she thought Dorothy was just wonderful and she just a great spirit, a great person.

She raved about her.

Yeah, so she gave me more of a picture because there were other people who were Tarski's allies or Maria's allies who thought of her as that woman that kind of thing.

So that's why I want to talk to her.

And she certainly sounds pleasant enough these days but she was the Mata Hari or not the Mata Hari, but she was the woman who broke up the marriage in a lot of people's eyes.

So which and I certainly didn't see her that way since there were many befores and many afters.

Yeah.

I'll be interested to read your biography Okay, don't hold your breath.

There's a lot certain amount of writing to do.

I've written another one.

I've written one before that you might be interested in reading.

It's called Politics Logic and Love The Life of Jean Van Hyenert And do you know who he was?

Yes.

Okay.

I didn't know him at all.

It got actually fairly widely reviewed and had a fantastic review in The New Yorker a few years back.

Yeah.

But that's a good book.

Yeah, yeah.

It was a fascinating project.

And so OK, well, you probably enjoy it.

Let's see, you can't find it everywhere.

I mean, it's in libraries, but you can Black Oak would be a place to get it or you can get it if you wanted to own a copy or they may not have it, but that's certainly on there they had it at one time.

So that's a place that would have it.

Cody's has had it.

And you can always order it from the publisher, of course, if you want.

SPEAKER_01: 0:37:21-0:37:22
It's not out of print.

SPEAKER_00: 0:37:22-0:38:07
No, it's not out of print.

It came out in ' ninety three.

I plunged right into this one.

Yeah, no, I did read reviews of it.

Yeah.

And then I probably recognized your name at the time, but you know, not knowing you Right, yeah.

Well, I think if you in fact if you're taking a plane trip, it's a great read on an airplane.

It goes fast, so you'll get there and you won't be able to put it down, you'll finish it in Paris, which would be perfect.

That was his city.

So try it.

Then you won't have to wait so long for this one.

Okay, good to talk to you.

Good.

Bye.

