AF: 0:00:01-0:01:51
Okay, we're rolling, Bob.

SF:
Chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp.

AF:
Where is that mic?
I guess this is the mic on the [???] here.

JR:
Do you have another letter from Stanford University?

AF:
Well, that's from E.D. Gellies.
Another Dale Reed letter. Do you think there's another Dale Reed letter?

So tell me again who it was that sent me compliments from...

JR:
Well Rick Falgner.

AF:
Yeah, Rick Falgner, but who's the guy, Klingenhofer?

JR:
Wilhelm Klingenberg.

AF:
Klingenberg.
He was a math professor?

JR:
He was on a [zega ???]
And he hung around for a couple of years.

No, he wasn't.
He was on a Swiss postdoc.
It wasn't even [zega???].

AF:
He was kind of good looking.
He's blonde and tall.

JR:
Not so tall.
Very pleasant.

AF:
Wasn't he good friends with Jaeger when Jaeger was here or something?

JR:
No.

AF:
Somebody else he was friends with him.

JR:
And he played the violin in his office.

AF:
Oh yeah?
And where's he been?

JR:
[Tubingen ???]

AF:
Uh huh.

JR:
There's some momentary confusion, whether it was Felgner, Felkner or Felscher.

AF:
There was a couple guys there, huh?

JR: 0:01:53-0:01:55
Yeah.
Well, Felscher was the original.

AF: 0:01:56-0:02:01
Felscher was the guy with the mustache who invited you too?

JR:
Yeah.

AF: 0:02:03-0:02:07
Who got locked in his office during the sit-ins or something?

JR: 0:02:08-0:02:09
That's right.

AF: 0:02:38-0:06:50
Reports from outlying communities.

AF:
Oh, in my several conversations today with various people, I spoke to Susan Bell, talking about the tribulations of getting reviewed.
She says she sent a book at the Minneapolis Star Tribune, let's say.

No, let me back up.
She was at a conference.
I think the conference was even in England.
And this woman came up to her and said, "I just loved your book.
I just read your book.
I thought it was wonderful."
And she said, "Oh, well thank you very much.
How did you how did you happen to come across it?"
She said, "Well, my son works for the Minneapolis Star Tribune."
And he was a reporter or something, and he was passing by and he saw this review copy on a shelf.

And he looked at it and said, "Oh, that looks interesting.
That ought to interest my mother because it's similar to her experience."
So he just picked it up and he brought it to her.
And she said, "And I just read it and I just loved it."
And she said, "Yes, and then what did you do with it?"
She said, "Oh, I kept it."

So much for review copies.
I was telling her how two and three review copies go to all these places and people haven't gotten time.
We were going through the various nightmares.
She said this for her was the epitome of the worst.
Somebody just lifting it!

I mean, people have said, they steal them, they take them, but to have somebody take it and hand it to somebody and then they say, "Oh, I love it."
You know, and it never goes back!

I'm sure she was looking crazy.
I said, "What did you say?"
She said, "I just stood there dumbfounded because I just didn't know what to say."

It looks like this battery is about to give out.
See that flickering of the light?

JR:
Was it about to give out before?

AF:
Maybe.

JR:
I thought it was flickering all along when you had it the other day.

AF:
It might have been, I'm not sure.

Well, I've done a lot of switching around to batteries.
Now bought a few new batteries, not loads.
As long as it's moving, I guess it's recording.

Anyway, the bookstore now seems totally committed.

JR:
Seven more copies.

AF:
Huh?
Pardon?

JR:
They ordered ten more copies.

AF:
They haven't ordered yet.
They're going to order.
Yeah I shouldn't sell them my seven.

JR:
Yeah.

AF:
Messes up his–

JR:
–his profits.

AF:
His great

JR:
Inventory system.

AF:
His great inventory system where he doesn't know where anything is or what's gone out.
There's no way he can check to find out what's happened with Beverley Woodward's book today.
Too late for that with his wonderful inventory system.

I don't know if his ass is screwed on or where. Did you see my memo to reminding them to call the, did you see my last message?
There were some final messages there about Beverly Woodward and then the wrong phone number and then I corrected that and then I said then I said about the book and then I sent the memo that Schaeffer, Gil Schaeffer at Blackwell on Thursday or Friday because he said he's going to be away he's going to be away from Thursday to Saturday.
And who knows if he's told Scott that Gil Shaeffer of Blackwell should be called on Thursday to Friday?
Yeah etc.

I would be a good bookrepper you would hire me.

JR: 0:06:50-0:06:51
Yeah.

AF: 0:06:51-0:07:00
You gave me a product I believed in.
Maybe if I had a product I didn't believe in, at least I would keep on the case.
I don't know what these guys do.

JR: 0:07:06-0:07:08
Well tell me what Giovanna said.

AF: 0:07:08-0:15:14
Oh, it's a beautiful letter.
It's a beautiful letter.
Read it.

In fact, I read it to Edie just because I called it.

JR:
You want some more salad?

AF:
No, you have it.

"Thank you very much for your card and the book on the Van Heijenoort's life, which I have read with great pleasure.
As you can imagine, I was eager to know about Van's life and I had lots of tender feelings, admiration, and reverence towards my Stanford roommate.
So I started reading the book, so to speak, on the side of Van, wanting to know the wonders of the life and personality of my hero.
Now, through page after page and love story after love story, I moved slowly and inadvertently over to the side of the women who happened to love him, and I ended up with quite a different hero, Bunny.
I found her love for Van so heroic.
I admired her strength in carrying the burden of everyday life for so many years and under all kinds of strains.
Her generosity, patience, devotion, naivete make her so profoundly human.
I'm glad and grateful to you that you gave her a prominent part in the book.
She had a biography too.

Van was enigmatic to me in Stanford and still is.
I wish I had an idea what his feelings were towards the people he met and loved.
But for me to know him, he would have had to be a different person from what he was, and this other Van is of no interest.

My most warm compliments for such an entertaining book, all best wishes to you and Sol.

– Giovanna"

Isn't that a beautiful letter?
No complaints about misusing her, which I had worried about the way that she would feel that quite happy.

JR:
Great.

AF:
I read that to Edie.
She said, "You know, you should have a book of the letters that you've gotten about should elicit another book."
And she was saying that a lot of... she finishes her book and sometimes she thinks of writing to the author.

She never does because it takes that extra bit of energy and thought and commitment.
And she figures having read the book and said, "Yeah, Edie, that's good."
Saying to herself, "that was good, that's enough."
And she sees that letters like this–

JR:
Make a difference.

AF:
Yeah, what a letter like this means.
I mean, I take it she's gotten letters, but maybe nothing.

You know, some of the letters are so personal.

JR:
Well sure.

AF:
But that has to do with the fact that people knew.

JR:
Yeah.

AF:
I mean, I don't think you could expect expect to get those kinds of letters from a historic about a historic figure.
I think Diane's gotten letters like that about her ancestors.

JR:
Sure.

AF:
The person is close to still being alive.

Anyway. I opened a letter, like her, with great nervousness.
Oh, what are you going to say?
You're going to complain about being misused.
And then when I read that, blitz.

JR:
Well, she wasn't.
I mean, you presented her as somebody on the side who couldn't help but overhear some of the conversations.

AF:
Right.
No, but I just felt that she might not have wanted me to even bring or– To reveal.
I had the feeling that she what she told me, she told me right away in the you know, two days after we knew he died, she told me all this stuff.
And if she had reflected about it, she might not have been quite so forthcoming, and that if I had shown her what I was going to write, she might have she might have wanted to change it or do something about that.
And I never didn't ever want to show her what... I didn't want to give her that opportunity.
And it was just there was a thing or two about what she said somewhere in the times between that made me have the feeling that she might feel that this was sensitive stuff that she was reporting.

I mean, she's not at all in a bad light, she's not at all gossiping.
She's just happening to be there, and it's an interesting story, the part about how she goes out and comes back and still talking.

JR:
Yeah.

AF:
But even so, I just feel that Giovanna is an extremely discreet person.
And she's a very private person herself, and that she might have felt hesitant to reveal all that if she'd seen it, and then she might want a hedge on it.

I didn't want to give her that.
I never wanted, I was always hoping I didn't have to give her that opportunity.

I'd thought of sending wanting to send this to Bunny.
I don't know how whether she would I mean, because I think it's a tribute to her, really.

JR:
Yeah, it is.

AF:
And it, except of the naivete, but even that if you can put it back into perspective of the time, she shouldn't mind about that.
But I don't think she's gotten the book.
So Bunny's on that list, the people who haven't gotten the book.
So what I'm going to do...

JR:
Now we should ask Warren again.

AF:
I'm not going to ask Warren.
I'm going to ask Scott tomorrow to call her. Bunny.
I don't want to call her and ask her to say they've been having some trouble with the comps and they're going over the comp list and they want to know if she's gotten hers.
And if not that he'll send her one right away.

She's the only person I really feel should have this book.
There are a lot of other people there on the list that I don't care if Warren doesn't get his book.
If Sydney doesn't get his book right away, that's okay.
I think Beverly should have it because he's so edgy.
Geyer should have it because she should have it.
And the rest of the people... So if Mark and Buster doesn't have it and if Dick Jeffrey doesn't have it and if Warren doesn't have it and all those people they can bloody well buy it or they'll get it sooner or later whenever it's not that important to me.

And the people abroad should have it too.
And there's some suggestion that those have been sent out.
When I got this from Corsey, I was hoping that she was on the last list, but she's not.

I know you see I haven't gotten mine that's supposed to be for Grisco.
And so if I haven't gotten it, nobody else has gotten theirs.

JR:
Yeah.

AF:
Now it's not flickering.
So maybe that flickering was just...

JR:
Is it still going?

AF:
Yeah.
It's flickering a little.

No, don't check it.

It's fine.
Don't touch it.

JR:
How long does it last?

AF:
Well, it's supposed to last half an hour, thirty minutes. It's a sixty minute thing, so thirty minutes on the side.

Which is shorter, you know, than my other tapes which are forty five, which is better.
But the thing about this is this machine can be slowed down so that it goes... But then the voice it sounds funny.

JR:
Yeah.

AF:
And you don't get as good fidelity, so I don't think I'd ever do that.
I mean, I've tried it once and it doesn't come out good.
Well, what you do is you slow it down and then on playback and speed.

JR:
So do you want to test this out?

AF:
No, I want to let it go all the way.
Do you mean test it out on the machine or just test it to see if it's working now?

JR:
Yeah.

AF:
Okay.
But of course on the machine I think you hear better because you get the–

[ABRUPT CUT. From this point on the recording is of AF with an unknown person discussing proofing some text. I'm leaving it unedited for now since it doesn't seem relevant to the interview or to Tarski/Montague.]

Now we come from the camera.

Okay, yeah, you ever see that.

What I have let's see we'll start with text.

I have keyboarded text all it requires me to sit down and go over it fairly carefully to make my textual notes and corrections.

And I think there's one blind Gobblesberg in it.

He has an insertion on the right hand side and then over that insertion he writes something.

default: 0:15:15-0:15:15
Okay.

AF: 0:15:16-0:16:20
And so I guess the other thing is to see whether that's a remark that if that should be in the text and that is or whether it's something that should be just put in.

Yeah.

I think that one word I still can't puzzle out from either the microphone or the photo path.

But I mean I shouldn't hold up the keyboard and I think that's just his handwriting deliberate.

I mean, I suspect that whoever's next in Princeton should just be sure I should note it down where it is and I will do that.

Is it too early for you to send us a copy of your draft or some routine copy editing of that sort of thing?

I said essentially if I sit down and work for two days on it, then it will be ready for me to email it down.

JR: 0:16:20-0:17:16
Okay torn down these cells This is the long lature not the knock the little says.

AF: 0:17:17-0:17:23
Yeah but oh this is not sure No, this is not sure.

This is not sure this is Oh yeah I'm sorry one looked over.

JR: 0:17:23-0:17:24
Let me take a look at that.

AF: 0:17:25-0:18:04
All right but basically it seems to me his text in good shape.

I suspect again the textual note is going to say things like this.

He uses a lot of abbreviations in this text.

He doesn't distinguish between singular and plural so FM can be function or function.

So I will simply put that text on note but I want to go over the text to make sure I don't I've got to spend time to go over the text once then it should be in good enough shape.

I'm fairly free about reorganizing the punctuation because it helps Now on expanding abbreviation sharp, have we been noting individual cases of textual notes or have we just been making it?

JR: 0:18:04-0:18:18
We decided several times that we were going to make we were just going to expand the note that we have expanded and in most cases there's not much of a question about that and we had up a question in nineteen seventy.

AF: 0:18:19-0:18:26
I mean I think that's a pretty abbreviate so much and in very few cases is there any doubt what they spanched?

JR: 0:18:27-0:18:30
I think what we decided to do was to comment whenever there was any doubt.

AF: 0:18:30-0:18:54
Yeah, all right.

I think that's appropriate.

Now prop is the main one that's involved Prop in Supreme There are sometimes where it's really unclear whether it means proposition or property but we have some discussion with Adams on that.

That's one of the few that's really interesting.

I want to go over that means that my best favorite I should be ready to email down and ask E file.

JR: 0:18:54-0:18:56
Okay text fairly soon.

AF: 0:18:58-0:22:19
All right but I haven't started formulating a textual note but that's what I gotta take notes to do.

Sure.

Okay.

The instructions we have a director proster came in of course after punctually.

I think I might want to send it back with some suggestions.

In particular he goes into a decent amount of detail about the technical differences, mathematical differences between this and dialectical, but he doesn't really say anything about the philosophical differences which seems to be there are an enlightenment expands his half sentence into maybe a paragraph just to note that they're there essentially.

Now the saying is that some of them are most emphasized in explicit things that are in the Princeton lectures.

And I'd like to try to portion this back to Trollster to give him some quotations to work with in the Princeton lecture.

Now we tell you we're not going to do that in volume three, but for Trollster's purposes it might be also Trollsta had a technical problem at the end.

Verdel makes a claim that it's possible to add the negation of there are properties such as it would be consistent to add the hiding arithmetic not for all x a of x or not a of x and he says you can prove that consistency using this interpretation.

Now you can, but by a fairly modern technique that isn't in evidence even here in dialectic.

And Charles just sort of scratches his head about what proof Guru Cloud had in mind.

Well now there is something about that in the notebooks right?

At least about the consistency of the statement not for all it.

But I'm worried I'm saying that I certainly don't want to stuff in a notebook so you know I can caution Charles to say that there may be growing material as yet untranscribed notebooks or something.

Well I think they've been transcribed No there's not a long thing but there certainly is some stuff on that in the Right Sector.

But my worry is that if there is some main to this in the Princeton lectures Charles really should stay before the final verse.

Sure.

The problem is well that required really looking for the Princeton lectures which I haven't yet done.

The microphone justice of Yale lectures is very faint.

It's very hard.

Full pages just impossible to really see what he's talking about through the microphone.

So that means I will need a philovap.

Would it be possible sometime when you're in Philadelphia to simply go over to personal look here?

I guess it would.

I think that would really be the best way to resolve that kind of question because even a photocopy I mean it's just not likely The last photocopies we got from the Naux I had to send several back because they were not legible.

I mean if you weren't going to be going down to Philly then that would be a big hassle but it's not that far from Rinceton and it probably wouldn't take you that long train is very convenient.

Yeah, it really wouldn't take that long to check it so I think that's probably good.

Yeah that's gonna hold things up that is because I don't want to send the stuff back to Trollster with comments until I can ascertain whether there's relevant material or anything.

Now it may be possible for my microphone to at least get that level but that's where I am on that.

As far as the actual if it wants to begin taking I can get something that's easier to be closed even if it's going to be a marked up paper copy as a well.

JR: 0:22:20-0:22:20
That'd be great.

AF: 0:22:20-0:25:31
I think the thing is even though you've got some stuff still to do, we don't want to be held up too long on getting into the tech because we can make changes in the tech later but we can do some things simultaneously Also if we can get some of the technique then that leaves Yasuko free or later to do the other things that will delay us less Okay relatively intending philosophy.

I have nothing much to add to what's said here.

The main problem is that I have not gone through the versions tried to make a final determination of what we will print, although we assume that we will follow the suggestions made several years ago by Mount Malmouth and Stein.

And this is holding up Stein as far as his own work is concerned but Cheryl just showed me this morning a very lengthy letter from a copy of various essentially technical problems textual problems I mean it just came in No, it's something I just it came in right before Christmas I just didn't get around to passing it on and it's going to have to be end of February I think before I can tackle this question.

So that I'm afraid means that I can't make very definite analysis as to let's say when we can begin putting the text into text when we can begin bearing down on Stein about the introductory note I feel we can't do that so long as there's an object we know exactly what he's writing introductory note to.

But do you think you will have time to reach at least start on this stuff you have to do before?

Yeah I think so I still have an overdue paper but since I won't be teaching I should be able to work simultaneously on that paper and go with it.

The other two overdue papers got taken care of.

They have been sent in where they're supposed to be published particularly real Albatra did they all know if Solomon ever got his Albatron paper Mitchell's deposition?

JR: 0:25:32-0:26:40
I had no idea Solomon And also was the student whose dissertation was unacceptable There is also on this forty six through forty nine apparently God himself was rather confused about what was the best version and just what at one point he had to make a chordance for himself of footnotes and such and there are some little remarks in shorthand all over the manuscript at one point something says that version B seems to be the better one but then there are two version B's so we're not too sure which one he was referring to.

So do you have copies of all those little pieces of paper that go along with it?

I'm not sure but when I get to work on it If you have a moment you might look through what I have here and see if there's anything there that you don't that you feel would be useful that you don't recognize.

AF: 0:26:41-0:27:12
Do you display this?

No it's not even leaving covered yet For AND although that's salt and he may want to add to it I mean now I'm really was on the task of getting design in and he's already revised it He did a beautiful job on reconstructing as Daniel had said rehydrating the lecture.

Yeah, no translation of course needed on this one.

JR: 0:27:13-0:29:18
I think that one is close to final form on just about I think so I have by the way one of my hands a proofreading on his introductory now we put it in tack So that one's in very good shape and star nineteen fifty as noted here we're simply not including anymore McMallon's recommendation But you're ready to felt it repeated things that had already been said and he felt it was just so close to other groups And presumably there's some comment about that In earlier versions of this documentary summary document summary there are comments about why he was No what I mean is in the final volume that will publish there will be some mention that this was why they cannot include because of two great Well that brings up a question that I think is on the unresolved issues, but since you brought it up, there are a couple of places where we had better mention that there are some documents in between the ones that we are publishing because for example we have a nineteen thirty nine D but we do not have a nineteen thirty nine C that's yet been published that will not be published until Volume four if at all.

So if we don't publish nineteen thirty nine C I even remember what it was but I know there is such a number if we don't publish that then I think we should publish a list of things that were considered for publication perhaps with a very brief explanation of why we didn't publish them just in order to complete that series because otherwise someone is going to wonder where Woah was nineteen thirty nine C I don't think it would be bad to have a little statement in the introduction for the reader of things that were considered and not included and either have a list there or else include those missing items in the bibliography but flag them somewhere as a dagger or something like that?

AF: 0:29:18-0:29:41
Whatever I mean we could talk about how to do it but flag them somewhere so that the reader realizes these are manuscripts that we decide not to include, but here they are so you can see what the titles were anyway and you can see What are the possibilities of fully eliminating from the bibliographic series all the ones that were not published?

JR: 0:29:42-0:29:43
Beyond that I think there are two.

AF: 0:29:44-0:30:04
I feel kind of antsy about having them having this numeration system depend upon whether or not whether or not they were considered Well the numeration system I mean as it stands we just list everything so it doesn't Well but you don't everything in that box?

JR: 0:30:04-0:30:07
No dated with a number and letter.

AF: 0:30:07-0:30:31
Well you see this goes back to something that I proposed earlier which was rejected which was that rather than this kind of thing for unpublished stuff that we simply give them a nonclause document number that I stamped on the documents.

That's unique and that would resolve the problem but what I mean if this is not why shouldn't it be possible simply if we decided we're not doing this

