JC: 0:00:00-0:07:42
nineteen ninety seven...

AF:
Okay, say it again.

JC:
We're sitting outside under a wonderful blue sky.

AF:
It is a beautiful day, doesn't it?
My tape takes about a second.
Anyway, still may seventh, nineteen ninety seven and still...

JC:
Were you here when I told Anita that Hacket awarded me a one percent royalty on Logics Semantics and Mathematics
After Tarski died.
And the way he did it was I asked him in the course of another conversation how the book was selling.
And he said, I can't answer that unless you are a member of the company or are getting a royalty.
This is privileged information.
Therefore you're hereby getting a royalty!

AF:
He sounded like a great guy.

SF:
He had a philosophical background?

JC:
I think he did.
I don't know exactly what it was, but he was the philosophy editor of Bobbs-Merrill before Bobbs-Merrill got took over by ITT and they made it into a, I don't know what the word is, but they started running the company in order to make a lot of money but not to serve the philosophical community.

AF:
Oh, a trade, a trade house.

JC:
Yeah.

SF:
I want to come back to this question of methodology of deductive sciences.
That's one thing.
You say Tarski didn't like the Vienna Circle, but their concept of the unity of science and of having some sort of my understanding a vision of overall vision of scientific methodology that seemed to resonate with that that there would be sympathies there rather than an antagonism.

JC:
There were several things that Tarski wrote that locked horns with the Vienna Circle.
Number one, they were irresponsibly negative toward the concept of truth.
They just had a bad thing about truth.
It was like somoebody-

SF:
Well Noira did.
Were there others?

JC:
There were until Tarski turned them around.
They gave him trouble about this.

SF:
Wasn't Karnap won over pretty quickly?

JC:
Tarski took a lot of credit for doing that.

AF:
Well, Karnap even gave him credit, I think, right?

JC:
Yeah.
By the way, it was not only the Vienna Circle, but it was also the Poles of the generation right before him.
Lukasiewić's logic book from nineteen twenty nine starts off with a gratuitous section in the preface how logic doesn't have anything to do with truth.
Now...

SF:
So people who reacted negatively first to the definition of truth, this whole explanation or explication as he used to call it, that was something that in turn got Tarski annoyed?

JC:
No, it was it wasn't that they were saying something against something that he did.
It was that they were being pig headed and irresponsible and not even listening.

SF:
I see.

JC:
People that paid attention and had responsible criticism, this didn't bother him.
What bothered him was irresponsibility and [AF: not listening], ignorance, yes.

Now, another thing that was of crucial importance, and you can find this in several of his articles, I think the beginning of Truth and Proof is crucial, where the distinction between a concept and the methods that are used to determine that the concept applies in a given case, this distinction, the distinction between property and criterion has been a major thing in philosophy going back to the Stoics.
And it-

SF:
Meaning that distinction was recognized or?

JC:
Yes.
And the importance of it.

SF:
Yes.

JC:
And it's the whole it's not the whole, but it's the distinction between what they call today the ontic and the epistemic, ontic applying to how things actually are and epistemic how you judge what is right that way.

This was denied by the positivists and they pretended that this was a principle of science that to all right thinking people, the meaning of the concept was to be identified with the methods that were used to determine.

You know, Einstein got into this one for a while.
He didn't know what he was doing, but he made noise that this was what he was doing.

And in order to even understand what the project of defining truth is, you have to be able to get clear about that.
He's not going to tell you how to find out whether a given proposition is true.
He's just telling you what you mean when you say that it's true.
And the denial of this he took to be just kind of an epitome of stupidity and the whole attitude that leads to this [STOPPED HERE] novel.

It's scientistic and want to find something for the bean.

Kind of environment.

default: 0:07:42-0:07:42
Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 0:07:47-0:40:16
Let's see.

Was there anything in personal relations with individuals in the Vienna Circle?

Yeah.

He thought that Wittgenstein was as a person, a real jerk.

Did he ever meet Wittgenstein?

He did?

Well, maybe I spoke too fast.

But his stories about Wittgenstein were all his versions of things that Karnat told him.

And I can't remember one place where he talked about any personal observations of Wittgenstein.

But he did not like the tractitus he thought it was pompous and obscure and it was lacking in knowledge of logic.

Would you like a hat?

Yeah, please.

Here's some sunset.

Actually, I have one.

Okay.

If you're not offended by it, it's more of a winter hat than I'm not offended at all.

Okay, but this is lightweight.

Okay.

It looks more winter.

It's all right.

Put the sunscreen.

You want any sunscreen?

No, I already have some on, thanks.

Whenever I'm out in California, I put it on in the morning.

Does it last all day?

I'm still alive.

I see.

Now what about his own philosophy which people have tried to Mostovsky made some noises in his article and Supis tried to say something about this, but nobody has come out with any very full point that Tarski had some sort of fully worked out philosophy?

No, he did not.

But he the reason that people have trouble categorizing this philosophy is because they want to fit him into molds that have already been set forth by other people.

And he was his own person.

He did not read philosophy.

He did not like talking philosophy with philosophers.

He felt that he was very well grounded in classical training and philosophy, but he wasn't.

You know, he read a few things and Sometimes he said he was a nominalist and sometimes he said he was a reist in the sense of Kotar Binski.

Did you know Kotar Binski's approach?

Yeah, I approach it.

Yeah, and what I mainly know is what's in that article that Tarski and Rinan Tarski and Ryinan translated one of Ko Targensky's articles.

Have you seen that?

No, yes.

It's tough going, but it's actually if you had a little philosophy as an undergraduate, there's nothing that's beyond So I will read that where did it appear?

It appeared in Mind nineteen sixty five.

In Mind?

Yeah, but it's in Tarski's collected works.

Oh.

Oh, yeah.

So it's not hard to now Did he talk to you?

He adored Kotar Binsky as a human being.

Did he bring him was that a subject of conversation?

Quine wrote a little book called The Pursuit of Truth in which he makes a radical shift in his own philosophy.

And it's a shift in the direction of Cotarbinski, amazing similarities.

I mean, a radical change in Kwine and remarkable similarity with Code Argensky.

And I wrote a review of the book and pointed this out and before I wrote the review, before I sent the review in, I wrote Kwine and told him this, and he was taken by this and said that he was in Poland in before the war in three.

Yeah.

And he's starting to remember these ideas being picked up there.

So that's what in pursuit of truth?

Pursuit of truth.

Just pursuit of truth.

No.

When did he do that?

Five years ago.

ten years ago.

What's the name of this guy in Twee again?

Webe.

WIEBE, Richard Webi.

And I'll give you his phone number.

I'll give you his address too.

You don't use email.

Oh, I have email.

Oh, Corcoran at acsU.

Buffalo.edu.

But I only read it when my wife has the same address, and the only time I read it is if she reads hers.

I see.

ACORA Corporan Corporan at acsu.

What?

Buffalo.

Buffalo.

That is.

So you aren't looking for messages, in other words?

No.

And I don't know how to get into it now.

It's all the messages that came.

No, but I mean in general, when you're back when you're back there, do you read it?

No, if my wife reads it and says there's something here for me, I'll read it.

I can't.

But she could be away for two months at a time making a movie for it.

Oh, oh, here's Webe.

Okay.

five one zero five two five nine four five zero And where is he again?

You say he's at Contra Costa.

I don't have his address here.

Contra Costa Somewhere Contra Costa.

Yeah, it's on Contra Costa Avenue or Street or whatever.

Oh, you mean it's in Berkeley?

Yeah.

Oh, not in not in So five two five nine four five oh.

Yeah.

Well, let me double check.

five two five nine four five oh okay.

By the way, when Shivant did his intelligencer article, did he interview you?

Yeah.

He had been thinking of writing a biography of Tarston.

Yeah, I knew that he was not doing anything about it.

So when Anita had the idea to do this, and I mean, we talked to him at that time about what his plans were.

Yes.

He said he wasn't doing anything.

He didn't so much like the idea that I was doing it, but on the other hand he wasn't doing it.

You know Yeah, he can't really mind.

Huh?

He can't really mind.

Well, I mean, you don't own anybody, but you can mine, but there's nothing What I mean is he has no right to Yeah.

You have no rights.

Yeah.

You tend to think of something as he did he did a lot of work and he did a lot of work beyond what he used for the intelligence.

Did you ever think of doing a biography yourself?

No.

No.

Why not?

No, it's not my thing.

Yeah.

But I wanted to ask you, since you do have these sort of global views, it seems to me of things, what you see are as some of the most important things in Taraski's life that ought not to be missed in the book.

And specifically in regard to his work and his relations with others and his character.

Now you've said a lot of things, but already as we talked about the main I think the central point in his intellectual life was a love of classical mathematics and everything that has to do with it.

That this was classical mathematics that is plain and solid geometry, number theory modern algebra as it developed classically analysis.

He had an intensely detailed intuition into all these things.

These were real to him.

Real?

Real.

This was reality.

And there was truth to be gained there, but it was something that you didn't philosophize about.

You know, you just do mathematics and you protect mathematics from people that want to define it in such a way that it doesn't exist anymore.

Like formalism, he hated for this reason, you know, that what these people are saying is not what mathematics is.

And it's not remotely like that.

You know, it's so classical mathematics is so far from what formalists say it is that you'd have to be a nut even to take it seriously for two minutes.

But he loved classical mathematics so much, why didn't he do classical mathematics?

He was in the first place very knowledgeable in number theory, classical number theory, very knowledgeable in geometry, and he wrote lots about it.

He did an analysis.

His decision procedure for elementary geometry came out of this things about aximatizations of geometry.

His ideas of definability his love of the methodology of deductive sciences was understanding what classical mathematics is.

He loved talking plain geometry, just amazing.

Did you ever get into it?

No, no, but I know he had that.

He was like a very smart high school kid up on lots of little things.

So why didn't he do that kind of stuff though?

Why do you think he went into you get set theory, you get a lot of set theory, which was very modern.

But he did it like it was classical mathematics.

But he wasn't limiting mathematics to when I say classical mathematics, I don't mean to limit it.

I mean to refer to a tradition that's still growing and that goes back to the Greeks.

He was fascinated by Euclid and he would love to speculate about what Euclid was really doing.

It was clear that he wasn't creating an axiomatic system in the modern sense.

But what is he doing?

And he used to talk to Sidenberg about this.

I think Seidenberg's dead now.

Yes, he knew Vreblin stuff very well.

The stuff that he wrote in the twenties with Linden on Foundations of Geometry show great appreciation of Devlin.

He had a great love for the Americans Devlin, Huntington, Bernstein, Langford, Wilson Pearce?

Pearce, but Pearce was before them.

But Perce was not in this tradition really starts around the turn of the century with Huntington and Dudlin.

And it's very clear and very modern compared to what Pearce wrote.

You can pick up Veblin's nineteen oh four paper and just read it.

You don't have to figure out what the guy's talking about or what funny terminology he's using.

How do you rank him with Girdel?

I would say as a mathematician, Gertel is in a different class.

Tarski was very able and very successful as a mathematician, but the cosmic creativity and imagination and astounding mental energy that goes into Girdel is superior to anything Tarski did.

And Girdel also is a superior writer of mathematics.

And Tarski was one of the great writers of mathematics in my opinion, but it doesn't compare to Okay, then getting back to our question of never having enough Tarski, see it's my intuition only that this rankled Tarski, but Tarski knew felt this and it bothered him.

He wanted to be what Griddle was.

How does that sound to you?

I was going to say, I've never said this before, sounds can, but you know about Bob Banning, Bob Bean in Mexico City he broad jumped twenty nine feet and the record had been something like twenty two feet or twenty five feet or something and they had been moving up the record by a couple inches or a tenth of an inch or something and he did it by ten percent or something.

That's the difference between Girdel and Tarsky.

What Girdel did in the nineteen thirty and nineteen thirty one cases are things that will never be equal.

Yeah, so don't you think it bothered Parsky being the competitive guy that he was?

I mean, if you're a broad jumper, how can you not be jealous of Bob Demon?

I mean Sure.

But the thing that annoys you is that you know that you're great and you can't even imagine doing this.

Yeah, but you see I think that well that's the thing is I think Tarski thought he could imagine doing this.

That's my taste that I have in my mouth.

Well, there were even little hints like in the truth paper at the end where on the undefinability of truth, he says he owes this result to Girdel, well the method the technique that needed to do it, but that he already had ideas of this sort himself.

Yeah, well I mean I have an idea that's important but by the way there's people there are people excuse me who do mention them in the same breath.

Yeah, I think in many ways in many ways they deserve being mentioned in the same breath Matarski had other virtues obviously he built a school, he did all the things that Girdel didn't do in terms of relations with pushed the development of at least one field Yeah maybe several but in a way that but just this business of their being close you know starting out at this kind of Gertel coming to him with his thesis with his paper and Tursky being the one to give the talk telling people about it in Poland.

And you can just imagine what this would do to somebody who's as ambitious as Tarsky was and he was ambitious from the word go.

So this is I mean this is all as I say flavor in my mouth because I don't know I don't know the work, but I know people That system that I put on the board today is another piece of Gole's genius I mean there are a hundred systems that he could have chosen to do the same thing with the way I'm going to leave you some papers recent papers of mine that relate to that system.

I'd be interested if you have any comments on that.

I have to leave in ten minutes.

I delayed my office hours by an hour but I still have to get there.

Okay but you should continue You should continue Yeah I want to leave.

You probably won't leave too because you don't want to So go ahead and ask By the way excuse me one thing I love just one thing, I love that cosmic creativity that wonderful wonderful way of putting it.

There was a claque that developed in Berkeley of which I always think of John Addison as being the leader that wanted to have this Tarski at the same level as Aristotle, Frege, Gertel, Tarski the four greatest logicians of all time and this was constantly repeated I've heard this one time.

Yeah I think there's some justification in this.

I think that as far as greatness as a logician is concerned they're comparable but Tarski's work is over a long period of time and it's a lifetime of cumulative achievement and dedication the kinds of things that Tarski accomplished Gertel could never accomplish.

You know you needed a sanity and a day in and day out energy relating to people worrying, doing a lot of reading, being critical, paying attention to what's happening in the field and so forth and Bertle wasn't doing that I'm not an admirer of Freder by the way No I think he was at the right place at the right time His the way that he's understood I think is absurd I mean but this is another story that's not I think that what Tarski did is much more important than what Freder did and it's not it would have been done by somebody else if it hadn't been done by Freder, probably better.

There's one thing I'd like to say as a matter of pride and that is that Maria told me that whenever I was around Tarski his health would improve a lot that I was good for him that he would sleep better, he'd be in a better mood, he'd eat better and that he would look forward to me coming.

He obviously sensed your great love and admiration even if you didn't say it and that meant a tremendous amount to him and I don't I think a lot of people didn't realize that people who were so intimidated by him in one way or another that they weren't comfortable in showing the affection that they had, but the people who did or Michalski, I don't know if you know him but I don't but I've talked he's actually coming in a few weeks and we'll talk to him more but I talked to him on the phone and he says that he realized right away how much Tarsky needed to be admired and that helped their relationship enormously because he could give back, he admired him.

He saw the I think very much like you, he saw all his faults but he liked him a great deal.

He admired him and he says Tarski's response to that was incredible because Tarski could also be incredibly mean to people.

You know he really did damage he was mean to me that night that I told you about Yeah But he could do damage like that so that he really damaged someone permanently and Butler is a case in point Right Well we have a lot of fun together Yeah well that's I mean But it's you know it's funny some people there are people who say Tarsky has no sense of humor.

I mean there are people who say that.

So I mean you know when you when you enter when you talk to a hundred people you get you don't get a hundred different stories but you get a lot of different stories If Tarski said something wrong you know we're working on something or even just talking, he said something wrong and say Alfred, this is not right and tell him why and he might want to argue about it and then we'd have a big argument but it would be always on a level of objectivity and you know there were good arguments and he liked us He liked to argue certainly did you talk politics?

No he told me a little bit about his politics but I wasn't interested.

I knew this was a this is not a good for personal relationship So you stayed away from you knew your politics were different from his.

Yeah he was much more serious about it than that.

Yeah Although there were I think he was a member of the ACLU and there were which I was for a year, still am and we were on the same wavelength on lots of political type things He used to make racist remarks though I mean he had an element of he liked to pretend that he was whatever liberal liberal A liberal a liberal in domestic policies, a conservative but in fact I mean he definitely had racist aspects to him and there's something I have to bring up with Steve at some point that apparently he made some remark about Steve a girlfriend of Steve's and somebody some story but he used to make remarks about people and he stereotyped he had these jokes stereotype type jokes and stuff like that so he even though he belonged to the ACLU Well he never pulled any of them on there On you But everything he did was based on the proper moral principle in his eyes.

He was principled to the core as far as he was concerned.

It was never that emotion was involved was his presentation of himself whereas in my opinion like everybody else those things had an effect on him.

Well good, maybe we can call you if further questions come up and do some stuff on the telephone.

Anything else that you've got on your list that you wanted to say about in your notes So you're going to send me what are you sending me?

Two things The letter the review does a list of these pardon?

Let me write these down these things How do you see it Steve since you've been here this time?

No I'm going to giving a talk at state SF state?

Yeah and I'm going to call him up and tell him that it's going to be real Do you know Diane Rieser Sarah?

No, I know her but I forgot that she was there.

She's in the math department?

Yeah, she may be in math education.

Okay she was Hankin' student and had no great love for Tarski as I understand it I talked to her a little bit.

Let's see did you know Wells, Pete Wells?

No he was Tarsi's last student And Judith never got her degree from Tarsky Did he talk about that to you at all?

No.

He told me that she was brilliant and as far as learning other people's ideas but she was not creative.

She could not do things for herself.

And by the way he thought that that's what Hanken's method of teaching leads to Hinken's method of teaching leads to brilliance but nothing But being able to understand other people's ideas but not knowing how to make them do your own But he was her teacher until the it wasn't Hanken that taught her, it was Tarky who taught her Excuse me Jonathan compliments maybe let me see the clues here.

Okay so you're going to hop on your bike Yeah Should I sign this?

No yeah and why don't I drive you?

SPEAKER_01: 0:40:17-0:40:20
Huh?

Well that'd be fine.

