SPEAKER_01: 0:00:00-0:02:54
 church back in the 50s, she did a couple of things.  Do you mind if I record our conversation so I don't need to take too many notes?  Oh sure, I guess.  You'll have to remind me not to cuss.  Well, it's going to be for private use.  For myself, I'm going to transcribe it  and so I don't need, like you know, if there are some details  that I find like, oh  I want to write them down but then I lose  track of what you're saying and that's all.  I learned that after this is the  103rd interview that I'm doing. No kidding. struggle with what you're saying and that's all. I learned that after this is the 130th  interview that I'm doing. No kidding. I've been working on this for three and a half  years traveling all over the world. It has been fascinating. I mean normally linguists  don't do this but you know it has been a mid-career challenge for me. What inspired you to do work on Richard? Well, so Richard, in the last four years of his life,  so from 1967, roughly 1966, 1967 until his death,  decided to do something that he hadn't done before,  which is apply the things that he  knew from logic and mathematics to better understand  how human language works, in particular how meaning  is transmitted by a human language. He really thought that there were some very basic properties how human language works, in particular how meaning is transmitted by a human language.  He really thought that there were some very basic properties  of human language in the way human language behaves  to transmit meanings that are very  similar to formal languages that he studied,  like the language of logic that was  his main focus of attention.  So in the last four years of his life,  he started this new research program  to show how you could do it.  He wrote three very influential papers.  And he was planning to do much more work from the archive.  You can see that he was planning to do much more work on that.  That had become the main topic of his investigation  when he died.  So that framework that he suggested and introduced  triggered the excitement of lots of young minds  that were facing problems and they didn't know how to solve.  And he gave them a solution, at least a path, a way to develop.  So a new field was created, the one  that is called formal semantics or natural languages.  And that field has been like, which is my field.  And in the past 40 years, it has grown tremendously.  Now it's become one of the main fields in linguistics.  But it didn't exist at all until his work.  So this was my contact with him.  Like, OK, he's my intellectual father.  But then nobody knew anything about him,  except people that met him and some other people,  because now they're getting old.  And you heard these scattered stories,  these very fragmented stories.  And what emerged was some sort of very complex and rich  personality with lots of interests and lots of skills,  but not a unitary picture.  And then my knowledge increased a little bit  when I was a graduate student at UCLA,  because Richard was a professor at UCLA until he died.  He became a professor very young, at age 24.  So he went from Oakland to the University of California.  Yeah, so when you guys, when you met him, you had the chance to meet Richard.  So when you met him, that's true, you guys were very young at that time.  You don't exist yet.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:54-0:02:57
 I wasn't a tear in his eye yet.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:57-0:03:38
 So Richard, when you met Richard, he was in graduate school at Berkeley.  He was doing, in particular, he was doing, he had just finished his Master in Philosophy and Mathematics  and was doing his PhD in Philosophy.  But with a logician, Alfred Tarski,  so he was actually in Mathematics,  although officially it was Philosophy.  Before he got his PhD, he got a job at UCLA.  So at age 24, he got a job at UCLA.  So in January 1955, that's when the congregation  organized a little party for him, based on he kept the flyer that was prepared, where's when the congregation organized a little party for him based on,  he kept the flyer that was prepared,  where there was the note,  or like it was January something,  they organized, let's get together to thank Richard,  he was leaving and blah, blah, blah.  See, I didn't know any of this.

SPEAKER_00: 0:03:38-0:03:39
 Yes, I can show you.  I was very young.

SPEAKER_01: 0:03:39-0:03:49
 Yeah, yeah, I know, I can imagine.  Dad came to the Oakland church in 1950,  and I would have been four going on five.  And so all of this was sort of peripheral to me,

SPEAKER_00: 0:03:49-0:03:51
 because I was just a little kid running around the church.

SPEAKER_01: 0:03:51-0:04:33
 Drinking the grape juice and stuff like that.  So Richard, in particular, was, according to what he said,  when he was hired by UCLA, he has to say,  he has to declare his previous employment.  And so he said that he worked for the First Christian Church  from December 1953 until December 1954,  when he had to leave to go to UCLA.  So at age 24, he became a professor at UCLA.  And by the time of his death, he was already,  although very young, he was 40, he  was already at the top of the full professorship,  earning as much money  as the most famous professor in the philosophy department  who was 65 at that time.  For heaven's sake.

SPEAKER_00: 0:04:33-0:04:34
 Yeah, I know it was just brilliant.

SPEAKER_01: 0:04:34-0:10:43
 Yeah, it was really.  This morning, since I was here, I made an attempt  to go to the St. Mary High School,  where it was two and a half years ago,  because I knew that there's some records about him  that they didn't want to release to me like two and a half years ago, because I knew that there are some records about him that they didn't want to release to me,  like two and a half years ago, for privacy reasons.  And so I came back this morning and said, look, guys,  I'm writing the book.  I'm writing the chapter.  I need this very little information.  Please help me.  I know that you have a little bit of records.  That would be great.  I managed to get the records from Berkeley.  They gave me all the records I have in my hands.  I have the records from what used to be called, I think,  Stockton Junior College, which I think is now Delta College.  It used to be a two-year college.  And it still is.  Yeah, and it was teaming up, I think,  with the University of what was called the College  of the Pacific at that time.  Some people would continue with the College of the Pacific,  and some people would transfer somewhere else.  So he did the first year, then he moved to Berkeley.  So I got the records and said, look guys, can you?  And so I was able to convince them.  And I got the records, and in the records,  you see that they measure his IQ.  After one year of high school, they must have noticed  that it was kind of like, okay, what's happening  with this kid?  So they measure his IQ, it's written as a hand note.  And his IQ was 129.  And I went to check, and IQ, you know, whatever a hand note. And his IQ was 129. And I went to check.  And IQ went, you know, whatever IQ can measure.  But an IQ of 129 is clearly, you are in the 97th percentile  of the population.  And the people that remember him from school said,  you know, he was very shy.  We don't talk much.  But he was a genius.  Everybody knew that.  He was the genius in the school.  He was put in the advanced mathematics class  with the older students.  The nun would ask the question about mathematics,  nobody would know the answer.  And so then she turned like Montague,  and he would give the answer.  So that's the man that we're talking about.  And so because of all this, I think, well, he deserves  his story to be told.  And also, given his tragic death,  and the fact that he was a homosexual,  and maybe the death was related with him being a homosexual,  there was a general cover up.  So the parents were destroyed, and he won't have any publicity.  And they died just a few years after.  They were old, and then they died a few years after.  UCLA didn't want any bad publicity.  So in the end, there was no memorial.  There was a funeral.  But usually, universities organize,  if you lose one of your members, even more so  if it's an important member, you organize a celebration,  a memorial, where friends and colleagues gather  to say good things about or do nothing.  Those were the days when it was hidden.  Yeah, absolutely hidden.  So that's why I decided, I had the idea in graduate school,  but then I thought, not good. If I the idea in graduate school, but then I thought  Mmm, not good. If I do this in graduate school, I'm never gonna get a job as a linguist  Nobody's gonna nobody's gonna hire me because if I know it's not a linguist that he wants to write biographies, you know  So I just I worked on my linguistic stuff. And so I moved to UC San Diego. I got tenure  Four years ago and without even thinking one morning I woke up and you know when  you feel those things inside you like I thought about the book now it's too late  if you don't do it now you know you're gonna lose everything people that you  can still find now they're not gonna be there anymore you cannot wait ten years  and you know you become a full professor you have to do it if you want to do it  you have to do it if you want to do it. And from that moment on, that's become, you know.  And I also said-  I had no idea that Richard was as famous,  at least in his community, as he was.  Oh yeah, I mean, like in linguistics,  like besides everybody knowing him,  like, you know, the field that he created for semantics  initially was called Montague grammar.  Yeah, okay. Yeah, and stillantics initially was called Montague grammar.  And still, this form like Montague or Montagovian  grammar means a certain way of analyzing  how language meaning works for certain aspect  and characteristics.  And you'll see the first papers that  emerged in the mid-'70s, influenced directly  from his papers.  You see questions and Montague grammar,  exclamatives and Montague grammar, comparatives and Montague grammar, exclamatives and Montague grammar,  comparatives and Montague grammar. Barbara Partee, she's a very  important linguist, was a young colleague in the linguistics at UCLA. She was  fascinated by the program that he was developing. She studied with Chomsky  before coming to UCLA as a linguist in syntax. Then came to UCLA and she was wondering,  how do I handle meaning with language?  Do I want to be as formal, as precise as syntax?  And that's exactly what Richard was doing at that time.  So when Richard died, for two years she stayed at UCLA,  she continued basically seminars,  and then she moved at Hummers, UMass,  where she developed an entire school.  And so she was very influential together with others,  but really, it created a field.  Wow. Wow.  I'm sitting here trying to figure out how I knew of him, at least secondarily.  We moved, Dad moved to the Whittier, First Christian, in 58.  And we were there until 68 and he died in 71.  71, 1971. So somehow there was still a connection. and we were there until 68 and he died in 71.  So somehow there was still a connection.  And I don't know what it was, because by then we were down south  and I was getting ready to go to college and stuff like that.  But somehow there was a connection because we knew the story of his death.  Ok, so you heard the story.  Yes.  He would be back to the Bay Area often,  because he kept a very close connection with Berkeley.  Every year he would come back several times.  He spent sabbaticals, which meant like a semester  at Berkeley teaching through the 60s, more than once.  He would come for talks.  He would come for work that he was doing with people.  So he would be in the Bay Area.  So he very possibly came to visit us there in Piedmont.  Yeah.  Interesting. And his parents were in, so they visit us there in Piedmont. Interesting.  And his parents were in, so they don't follow him to Los Angeles right away.  So Richard moved to Los Angeles in 1955.  His parents, I don't have the precise dates, I know for sure that until the late 50s they  were still living in Oakland.  And then probably 61, 62, 63, at the latest. They moved to Los Angeles,  they bought an apartment complex,  they were living in one of the apartments  and managing the others.  I mean, the apartment was bought by Richard,  and so they were living in it.  What part of town was that?  So Richard was living,  if you're familiar with the late geography.  Pretty much.  Okay.  He lived there for 30 years.  Okay, Moaland Drive?  Oh yeah.  Okay, very close to Coldwater?

SPEAKER_00: 0:10:43-0:10:47
 Not a real, I mean, not down and out. No, but. Moaland Drive? Oh yeah. Okay, very close to Coldwater?  Not a real, I mean, not down and out.  No, he was doing pretty well.

SPEAKER_01: 0:10:47-0:10:48
 You don't hear very many apartments in Coldwater or...

SPEAKER_00: 0:10:48-0:10:49
 He went up UCLA and went up the hill.

SPEAKER_01: 0:10:49-0:10:56
 Yeah, yeah, totally.  So like, in fact, the people in the philosophy department, only after his death, found out  more about him because they thought, how can he have that house?  He organized parties and other people would do often because he had a large house.  You know, they would drive up to the top of the hill and they would have a party.  And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.

SPEAKER_00: 0:10:56-0:10:58
 And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.

SPEAKER_01: 0:10:58-0:15:52
 And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host.  And he was a very good host. And he was a very good host. And he was a very good host. And he was a very good host. And he was a very good host. department, only after his death found out more about it. Because they thought, how can he have that house?  He organized parties, and other people would do often,  because he had a large house.  You know, they would drive up to Mulholland Drive.  And this house was on a cul-de-sac on Mulholland Drive.  So facing a closed canyon with no buildings around.  It's a beautiful house.  I saw the pictures from when I went  to talk to the police detective.  And so he showed me the file with a Montague case.  And the police took pictures of the inside, at least  the master bedroom where the body was found.  And so I have an idea of the house,  because unfortunately the house was bought in 2010  for $4 million, destroyed completely  to build an $8 million mansion in the modern style, which  means these castles.  But the house was big, but it was not super big, with a nice garden around, facing this  beautiful closed canyon.  People remember the parties that he would organize.  So that was another skill that he had.  What I've discovered is that he was a good stock market and real estate investors.  So was he murdered?  Well, all we know is what you can reconstruct from the coroner's report.  So he died because of asphyxia.  That's pretty clear.  So there was, and the body was found asphyxiated with a towel around his neck.  I had heard that he had drowned in his bathtub.  No.  So actually, the detective asked me  if I wanted to see the picture.  I said yes.  So I actually saw the picture.  So I know where the body was.  So the body was right next to the bathtub.  So imagine the master bedroom, you have the door,  and you have the bathtub.  You can see it from the door.  And you see the body diagonal. But it was not found in the bathtub. It was right next, the door. And the bathtub, you can see from the door, and you see the body diagonal.  But it was not found in the bathtub.  It was right next to the bathtub.  At least, that's where the body was found.  The body was completely naked.  And there were no signs of violence on his body  except for the asphyxia.  So for basically the strangulation  that caused asphyxia, and that was his death.  The coroner's report shows that he was a very healthy man.  There was no problem of any kind.  He confirmed that there were no damage of any other organ.  And nothing was stolen from the bedroom.  The wallet was there.  The detective showed me, he said,  Ivano, all the drawers are closed.  Everything is in order.  If you're a thief, first of all, there's  no reason to undress the person that you want to murder.  And second, the first thing that you do,  you start opening everything, looking for valuables.  It's not a robbery.  It was not a robbery.  So unfortunately, the only eyewitness  is not with us anymore.  He had a roommate.  It was called roommate.  I don't know what it was.  But he had a roommate.  He was a landscape architect, same age.  And that's the guy that talked to the police,  and that's what the police reported.  He died in 1985.  Probably was gay as well, and probably that's  the hypothesis he knew more.  And the detective agreed with me.  But what happened, and you see that from the investigation,  as soon as they get the call, they say, ah, Beverly Hills,  Mulholland Drive, UCLA professor, they send two teams.  Two teams arrive early in the morning.  The ambulance arrived.  Probably Richard was still alive, but in a coma,  and he died right after because of the consequences.  So it didn't take that long by talking to the roommate  and to Richard's ex-partner, who immediately arrived, Bob,  to understand that he was a gay man.  And maybe what happened is that it  was maybe some sort of swearing, and something went wrong.  At that point, the investigation ended.  So no more effort was made, and the case was basically closed.  There was no real investigation.  They don't even take... like the car that  the people, the roommate said, I saw two or three black guys. I don't know what  that means. Anyway, they drove away. It's always a black guy. Yes, I know. It's never a white guy.  Especially because what I think was happening there is the roommate knew  more. He knew more.  It knew more.  But according to his story, how plausible it is, this house was a nice house, but it  was not a castle where you don't hear.  So according to his story, I mean, how can you believe this story?  This is what he said to the police.  He said, that evening, Richard and I went to celebrate his father's birthday.  And actually, it's true.  It was the, what a birthday. Saturday, March the 6th, 1971, Monti, well, Edgar Monti,  everybody called him Monti, was celebrating  his 82nd birthday.  So according to the roommate, he went to talk to,  they went for dinner to his father's  place, they came back and Richard was somebody with lives, very separated lives.  This is the professional life.

SPEAKER_00: 0:15:52-0:15:53
 Compartmented.

SPEAKER_01: 0:15:53-0:17:21
 This is my family.  These are my friends.  This is the business.  In fact, lots of these people get to know each other at the funeral.  But now this roommate is special and goes to see, you know, even, you know, spend some  time with the family.  Then, according to the story, they go home 10 p.m. Each of them goes out. But how come Richard uses  John's car? According to what John says, well, Richard told me that his Bentley, because Richard had a Bentley, his Bentley  had some ignition issues. So he asked me if he could use my car.  And I had another car from my office, so I used that one.  So we went out separately.  Then we came back.  I came back at 2 AM.  Nobody was at home.  So I went to sleep at 3 AM.  He was not at home.  And then around 6.30 AM, I get woken up by somebody rushing  down the stairs.  So the house has two levels.  The master bedroom was upstairs.  Probably he was downstairs.  And that's when I look outside the window  and I see two, three black guys, they steal my car.  And so I call the police right away.  Now you see two, three black guys  rushing away from your place.  You know that you have a roommate.  The first thing that you do is to call the police.  They're stealing my car.  You go and check what's happening.  Say, Richard, have you seen anything?  No, he doesn't do that.  10 minutes later, I calls the police to say send an ambulance here, there's a body.  This story.  Man, oh man, there's all kinds of holes in that story.  You're right, I mean you don't need to be a very deep detective to realize it.  But they didn't sound like they were interested in really checking it out.

SPEAKER_00: 0:17:21-0:17:34
 Maybe because part of it was because of a sexual orientation  and it would  Bring up a whole bunch of stuff. You know the you remember when I was at all Saints, you know

SPEAKER_01: 0:17:34-0:17:50
 seeing it all Saints in Beverly Hills and  Owen Brady I was a soloist at all Saints in Beverly Hills back in the early 70s. And Owen Brady was the choir director.  This is fancy, I mean it's a really wealthy church.  It's right there on Santa Monica Boulevard.

SPEAKER_00: 0:17:50-0:17:51
 Yeah, I know where it is, yes.

SPEAKER_01: 0:17:51-0:19:58
 And so Owen Brady was the choir director there.  He was also the director of music  for the city of Los Angeles, big time back.  He was gay, but that was kind of,  he'd had a family, you know,  and then he discovered who he really was.  But those who knew him well knew that he was gay.  If you were close to him enough, otherwise...  But nobody else.  No, you wouldn't have known it.  He didn't have the tendencies or anything.  So in 1973...  He was one that his family life was one thing.  Yeah.  But he had a tendency to want to go into South Central LA  and pick up young black boys.  See? And so one Saturday night, one Sunday morning,  there was this big hubbub at the church because it was discovered that he had been  murdered in his car and his car had been set on fire.  And so that's the second gay gay brilliant musician that I knew who had  been murdered and then I've known another one too.  Do you, sorry can I ask you, do you remember around which time,  which year this may have happened? 73. 73 so two years after?  Yeah, 73. So his name was? Owen Brady. I want to do a little bit of research. I'm curious to see.  And did they ever find out who did it? I don't think so. Because probably it's another one of the...  You know the cold case unit that was created? That's the detective I talked to. Because the original detectives don't...  One is dead and the other must be very old. So the detective I was mentioning earlier is the one that reopened the case because it's an unsolved murder. So I may actually ask  him if they... Owen like H...  O-W-E-N.  O-W-E-N, okay.  Brady, just what it sounds. I think there's an E in it, but I'm not positive. I did look  it up.  Okay, Owen Brady, and he died in 1973, and he was the music director?  He was the music director at All Saints in Beverly Hills and also, as I understand his  title was the director of music for the city of Los Angeles.  Big time stuff.  Wow, definitely a high visibility person.

SPEAKER_00: 0:19:58-0:20:02
 We all were shocked.  I mean, we hadn't gone to church yet.

SPEAKER_01: 0:20:02-0:20:06
 No, we got a phone call in the morning, or news on the radio or something.

SPEAKER_00: 0:20:06-0:20:56
 Yeah, it was on the radio, and we were just shocked.  We just stood there and looked at each other and went.  The first thing that came, first thing we said was,  what in the heck was he doing in South Central?  Every white guy knows you don't go down  South Central after dark.  Everybody does.  And we were just, just.  And his was kind of hush hush, too.  You had the service in the memorial,  but it was, you know, then it wasn't talked about anymore.  And that's one reason why I kind of like living  in the day and age that I do,  because it's not in the closet.  I think all of, at least the majority of us,

SPEAKER_01: 0:20:59-0:22:06
 at least everybody knows someone that is gay  or has a family member that is gay.  So it's not, you know, so poo-poo.  There was a third one that I knew too.  His name was Garnell,  now this would be totally unconnected, I think.  Garnell Copeland, brilliant musician and organist.  He was a protege of Newton Pashley,  who was at First President Oakland for his entire career.  And I met him because Newton Pashley was there.  I went over to sing at First Pres a number of times,  and Newton was there.  Anyway, Garnell was a young kid, probably 20, 22.  But he was black.  No.  Well, yeah, he was a mix.  That's right, yeah. But he was black? No, well yeah he was a mixed, that's right.  Yeah, okay. And my association with him is he did a concert at Grace Cathedral  in San Francisco and I got up in the route and I dropped some microphones and  I just take it and all that. Anyway, shortly after that he was called to be the  organist at the National Cathedral in Washington DC.  Wow.

SPEAKER_00: 0:22:06-0:22:08
 That's how good he was.  That's an important position.

SPEAKER_01: 0:22:08-0:22:16
 And he got murdered.  In Washington DC?  Yeah, I think it was in Washington.  I'm not positive of that.  This would have been...  Do you think it was related to his sexual orientation?  Yes, absolutely.

SPEAKER_00: 0:22:16-0:22:17
 He was gay as well.

SPEAKER_01: 0:22:17-0:22:48
 Sorry, how do you spell his last name?  Just like the...  Copeland?  Copeland.  C-O-P-E-L-A-N-D. And Garnell would be G-A-R-N-E-L-L I presume.  Okay. And that would have been, let me think about this, I was here, let's see, dad came  back up in 68 and I came up to do my conscientious objective work in 1969.  And he was in this area.

SPEAKER_00: 0:22:51-0:22:54
 It was probably 1970 or 71.

SPEAKER_01: 0:22:54-0:23:17
 Around the very same time.  Yeah.  Around the very same time.  1970.  I'll check for that.  No, that's actually important because one thing  that I was trying to do  and to build on the chapter, I still  haven't completed the chapter about the death,  is to get a sense of how not unique.  I mean, the specific details are unique.  But there seems to be a pattern.

SPEAKER_00: 0:23:17-0:23:20
 And now these two examples really like.

SPEAKER_01: 0:23:20-0:24:04
 Three brilliant musicians, all three gay,  and all three murdered.  I mean, we are dealing with people  that were clearly gifted, that had a side of their personality  that they realized could not be shown.  And that probably in order to create some space for that,  or the way they shaped that space,  was a very dangerous one.  Because if you think about why, at least  in the case of Richard, and probably in the case  of Owen, part of increasing the risk is the fact that if you have fascination with this  kind of, this part of the population, and there is actual segregation, you as a white  man entering those areas, you put yourself at risk.  Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 0:24:04-0:24:05
 Just automatically.

SPEAKER_01: 0:24:05-0:24:54
 Automatically.  So and in fact, I mean, the police,  that's in the police report.  When Montague died, one thing that they did,  they got a picture of his car, a picture of him.  And they went around, because in his master bedroom,  they found a Greyhound bus station timetable  from the LA Greyhound bus station, which  is in that nice area of downtown. Greyhound bus station timetable from the LA Greyhound bus station which is that  nice area downtown. And the car was found outside the Greyhound bus station.  And so they went and the car was found there. What did the police do? They left  a policeman for 24 hours to observe if anybody would go back to the car. Of  course, you know, you just murdered somebody you go back to the car. And then  they got the car and they never took the fingerprints inside.  Isn't this, there's just, it's like there's a conspiracy almost of.  No, I mean, they shut it off completely and said we don't care, nobody's gonna care.  He's one of those.

SPEAKER_00: 0:24:54-0:24:55
 Yeah, he's one of those.

SPEAKER_01: 0:24:55-0:26:55
 Yeah, probably that was the attitude.  So, one question that I had for you, Mark, is as much as you can reconstruct, well,  first of all, I would like to know a little bit more about how your parents ended up in Ukraine.  So a little bit about their background.  Also to get a sense of what kind of community they found  and what kind of community they built.  Because I'm interested in, you know,  Richard played a role in that community.  So I'm trying to get a sense of what kind of community  did he find?  What kind of people your parents were and the community was?  And how he could have interacted?  It sounds like he stayed close to them.  So from, you know.  It does.  I'll just back up a little bit then.  I was born when my dad was at the church in Ontario.  He then went to Chino State Prison to become a chaplain.  From there, he moved. and we lived on the grounds  of San Quentin Prison.  Our house was right next to Warden Duffy's house,  and he was a supervising chaplain  of the state prison system.  In 1950, he got called into the regular ministry  at Oakland First Christian.  It was a thriving community then  of probably at least a thousand members.  Wow.  At least.  The sanctuary, I know this building just so intimately, the sanctuary seats exactly 500  people plus 50 some in the choir loft and the place is full all the time.  So he went to a very thriving community and this, well you've been by the church so you know.  It's a stunning place, just stunning.  It doesn't look anything like it used to.  It needs some serious renovation.  I want to ask you, so it looked better like 40 or 50 years ago.  In fact, if you remember when you went by there,  you might have seen two large redwood signs  that said First Christian Church.  When those signs were put up, my dad's name was engraved in the actual wood of the church.  So each subsequent minister had a board that was nailed over his name.  So his name still exists there.

SPEAKER_00: 0:26:55-0:26:56
 So it's under.

SPEAKER_01: 0:26:56-0:26:57
 Yeah, it's under there.

SPEAKER_00: 0:26:57-0:26:58
 Is this open?

SPEAKER_01: 0:26:58-0:28:00
 Yeah, that's an old picture.  It's not a really good one, but I kind of like it.  Yeah, it is.  I've got hundreds, if not thousands of slides  of the church that's the problem this would be from the 70s so I didn't I  didn't go through them because they're not  this is an earlier picture though because, because judging by the card, these are not so many.  Yeah, this would be out of the 50s.  Yeah, this could be the 50.  In fact, well, so anyway, let me finish up that thought.  So then that would pretty much cover the period  when Richard was there.  And it was, like I say, a thriving community.  You can tell it was very prosperous,  because ministers didn't get paid much. My dad didn't get paid a lot of money. like I say, a thriving community. You can tell it was very prosperous because  ministers didn't get paid much. My dad didn't get paid a lot of money.  And we met our Parsons in Piedmont. I don't know if you're familiar with Piedmont.  It's a little bedroom community. Oh yeah, it's a fancy community. Yes, I heard about doing the research.  They told me, oh yeah, that was the area for the wealthy people.

SPEAKER_00: 0:28:00-0:28:06
 We lived on the other side. If the pastors lived in Piedmont, you know the church was.

SPEAKER_01: 0:28:06-0:28:31
 OK, now also I understand why.  They were paying Richard very well.  Richard was paid more than what UC Berkeley would pay him  as a teaching assistant, monthly.  So he would get $150 a month from UC Berkeley,  and $180 a month from the church.  I thought, well, this is clearly a community that has money.  So your father found that community,  which was already thriving.

SPEAKER_00: 0:28:31-0:28:32
 Yes.

SPEAKER_01: 0:28:32-0:28:55
 It was already a large, wealthy community.  Yes.  And he was an absolute dynamic minister and preacher.  I say, the best I've ever heard, he had a mentor, his name escapes me right now,  who was the preacher at the Riverside Church in New York  City, the one that Rockefeller built for this guy.  I have some of his sermons on DVD.

SPEAKER_00: 0:28:55-0:28:58
 Yeah, I can't remember.

SPEAKER_01: 0:28:58-0:35:14
 But anyway, I'm getting off track here.  So this community was healthy, dynamic, wealthy, and just extraordinarily stable.  And so you can understand that.  The only complaint I've ever heard about him was he's talking about this weasel organ.  And it was.  So you were complaining about the organ.  Well, you wrote to me about that.  It was a 1929 Moeller.  It was 29 ranks.  And it stayed that way until in the 70s when my friend Bob Schertl and I, he was the wife  of the, husband of the choir director then, We went in and we rebuilt that whole organ,  put in about 30 more ranks and all that sort of thing.  But again, that's decades later.  Do you agree with Richard's evaluation of the organ then?  It was not a big or powerful instrument.  Across, a couple doors down,  was the First Congregational Church  that had a wonderful organ. Oh Oh what's the guy's name?  This flashy organist from the 50s and 60s. I can't think of his name. And then of course  First Press, which is on Broadway, had an actual speaking 32-foot stop mammoth organ. So ours was kind of... It was just okay.  And also, you know, Richard, before working for  First Christian Church, he...  every year he had changed job, going up and being paid more.  So, starting from when he moved to Berkeley,  in 1948, he started having jobs  right away as an organist. He always worked  initially just as an organist, and then became also the music.  And every one and a half year he would change.  And you see because in his declaration he would change and his title would get more  important and the pay would raise.  So he started with something like 60, 70 a month, over to 180 when he was hired.  So he was a good businessman too. From a good businessman. From the very beginning.  From the very beginning, yes.  Wow, how interesting.  And I can see from, for example, Richard joins the community  and they start organizing a series of concerts  on top of the regular service.  So these were like, the season is announced,  there were concerts.  I think there were four for each order.  And sometimes Richard would play, would just give concerts by himself, season is announced, there were concerts, I think there were four for each quarter.  And sometimes Richard would play, would just give concerts by himself, or the choir would  give concerts.  So I, and looking at the program, it's kind of varied.  And it looked like, you know, an intense activity on top of the regular.  The music program was major.  Choirs all the way from little, you know, three-year-olds all the way up to the adults, and they did some significant projects.  So yeah, I think it would have been fulfilling for him, and he probably had a really good time, except for the Huesio organ.  Like for example, they prepared Handel Messiah, which you know, it requires a certain kind of preparation. It's not something, you need a real choir  and you need like a real music group to perform that.  Sure, I've done it hundreds of times.  Yeah, okay, so you know what I'm talking about.  It's not like, it cannot be just the amateurs  that get together once a week and you can perform that.  And it was a public performance.  So it looks like it was very much engaged,  which is even more amazing to me,  because at the very same time, he  was a teaching assistant in mathematics at Berkeley,  and he was working on his own PhD.  Amazing.  Yeah.  I mean.  Yeah, in fact, the Messiah, you say that.  The first real big solo that I did  was doing the tenor solos in the Messiah at First Presbyterian  back in 1970 or 71.  That's pretty much all I remember.  I thought it was a long time.  So do you have any memory?  I mean, you were young, but maybe based on later time,  or stories that you've heard.  Did you have any memory about the kind of community  in terms of openness?  So you can be a rich and wealthy community,  but kind of rigid and more on the conservative side.  Or you can be in the mid, you can be more on the liberal side.  Do you have a sense of that?  I do.  And it comes from not only just my personal experience,  but the Disciples of Christ denomination as a whole  has always tended toward the liberal side.  That's the impression that I have. Religion and politics. Christ denomination as a whole has always tended toward the liberal side of religion  and politics.  And although I don't know until later on, years later, that the gay community was completely  welcomed, I don't know about then, because you just didn't even talk about those things.  Back then, the Ponders and the, I can't think of the other names now, were the two black  families in the church.  That I, I was still there as far as I know.  But that was kind of notable because it was a very white  community, very white community.  But it doesn't mean that they weren't thoroughly accepted,  not accepted, but welcomed, you know.  They were a significant family.  Those two families were significant families  in that church, even back then with that huge congregation.  The same thing would have been true in Whittier  when Dad went down there.  That was a congregation of 2,500.  But again, I'm getting off point here.  So the point I'm making is that by ultimate definition,  the disciples of Christ have had that basic  political and religious philosophy and still do. Now you go back to Oklahoma and  it's gonna be different but here in California you know the Western more  liberal the left side that was an experience that I can attest to  absolutely. What about since you it sounds like he, remember he's preaching his way of being,  what about your father?  In terms of his own view about the world, society, people,  do you have any memory of that?  How would you describe him?  You describe him.  Oh, okay.  Who, my father-in-law?  Yeah.  You heard him preaching off times and got a sense of...  Uh, uh...  A...  dynamic,  very dynamic,

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:14-0:35:22
 um, um...  not boring,  um,  storyteller.

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:22-0:35:31
 Um, he would start  a sermon-like with a story  and then go into the Bible part of it.

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:31-0:35:43
 And then it'd end up somehow that Bible story  and that story of what was happening came together.

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:43-0:35:45
 You'd have you laughing and crying within five minutes.

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:45-0:35:50
 20 minute sermon.  No more than 20 minutes.

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:50-0:35:53
 Still, keep the attention of hundreds of people.

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:53-0:36:05
 He was.  I mean, when he was at Whittier, and we  were attending Whittier at the time,  the church needed a new roof.

SPEAKER_01: 0:36:05-0:36:11
 And if a big church like this one was, like Oakland was.

SPEAKER_00: 0:36:11-0:36:13
 Bigger than that one, about twice the size of the sanctuary.

SPEAKER_01: 0:36:13-0:36:32
 And everyone, every Sunday, he would talk about that roof.  We needed a new roof.  And every Sunday, he would do it.  And we were sitting next to some good friends of ours  that had just joined the church, probably within the year.

SPEAKER_00: 0:36:32-0:37:11
 And she reached in.  She got her, he would say, $40,000 from our goal.  $40,000.  Now, that may seem like a lot to you, but it really is just a drop in the bucket.  What could you do with $40,000? God wants you to take care of his home, his house. So  she reached in her wallet, got her checkbook out. I wrote a check, think for $10,000 and she said now maybe  that'll shut him up and we won't have to hear it. Was that Ruth Shannon? No. It wasn't. That was

SPEAKER_01: 0:37:11-0:37:18
 Sue Pope. No. Yes it was. It was Sue Pope. She says now maybe this will keep his mouth

SPEAKER_00: 0:37:18-0:37:32
 shut and we won't have to listen to this anymore. And sure enough, sure enough, a  couple of weeks later,  he had all the money.  And it did not take him long.  He was frugal.

SPEAKER_01: 0:37:36-0:37:41
 Very good businessman, too.  He ran a big church very well.

SPEAKER_00: 0:37:41-0:37:46
 A president for Eschaton, which was at that time a non-profit.

SPEAKER_01: 0:37:46-0:37:58
 It built hospitals and...  Hospitals, low-income housing, that sort of thing.  It's still rather significant here in Northern California.  He was the second president of that, correct?

SPEAKER_00: 0:37:58-0:38:27
 Uh-huh.  I was a second employee of that company. Now they're still in Sacramento, but they now  seem to concentrate on senior citizen housing.  But my father-in-law was a dynamic minister.  He was a unique man.  So is that as much as I could say about him?

SPEAKER_01: 0:38:27-0:40:03
 I have a question for you.  Actually, do you want to add anything?  Maybe.  I'll think about it.  So in the question, part of the reason why I ask this  is that Richard gets hired by your father  at a very special time of his life.  So he's hired in December 1953, right around  the time when Richard is arrested. And from the end of 1953 until April 1954, he's really  risking a lot. I mean, he's in jail for 24 hours, then the father pays the, what is called the? The bail.  The bail, thank you.  Is released, but then he goes in front  of like the first interrogation.  The judge said, yes, there is enough evidence  to go to a trial.  So he went in front of a jury.  And it went on until he caught a hung jury.  At that point, the DA had to decide,  am I going to have another trial with a different jury or not?  And that's when the powerful professor from Berkeley,  Alfred Tarski first, but all the others too, went to talk to him  to say, he's a genius.  You need to let him study.  We are going to work together on this issue,  but that's not going to happen again, and so on.  So the reason why Richard was arrested  is another of those complicated stories  at that time.  And again, relatively little is known.  After two years of research, I managed  to go to the Oakland courthouse and find  this document, which is just the transcription of the first,  let's see what it's called.  It's the?  Arraignment?

SPEAKER_00: 0:40:03-0:40:04
 Well, it's basically.

SPEAKER_01: 0:40:04-0:41:44
 Preliminary?  Yes, the preliminary interrogation that only concerns,  it doesn't concern the alleged,  the person that may have committed the crime,  but it's just the witnesses.  And in particular, in this case,  there's only one witness,  who is also the person who called the police,  who is also directly involved in the story.  So, at that time, he was almost 17-year-old.  He was studying mathematics.  He was in high school in Berkeley.  And he called the police by saying  that Richard Montague had made sexual preference on him.  And that's another story that makes very little sense.  I read the transcript very carefully.  And basically, first of all, the guy was six feet tall and big,  white guy, big.  And you see from what he says, he's  the one conducting the conversation.  Montague says hi, but then he says, oh, you go to Berkeley.  Oh, yeah, I want to study math.  Oh, you do math.  So he walks with him without any uncertainty,  and at a certain point they arrive home.  And that's where according to him, you know,  like Richard said, you want to keep walking.  That's what, again, what he says.  Says, for what?  And that's where Richard says, well, you want a blow job.  And he says, why not?  And then Richard's lawyer stops him and he says, excuse me, why did you say yes?  And that's the top of the story.  Well, it's not that I wanted it.  It's just that I was not sure that by him asking that to me, he would have committed  a crime.  But I knew for sure that if he had tried to do anything, he would have committed a crime.  So I went along.

SPEAKER_00: 0:41:44-0:41:47
 What? That's what he tells me. Gosh. I knew for sure that if he had tried to do anything, he would have committed a crime. So I went along.  What?  That's what he tells you.

SPEAKER_01: 0:41:47-0:45:53
 God.  And in spite of this, the judge says  there is enough to go in front of a jury.  So I think what happened is that they just said something.  But then the end of the story is that he goes home,  and it gets even more paradoxical.  He goes home, he lives right there.  So they go and Richard says, well,  do you know a place in the area?  Yes, I know a couple.  He takes them to the little wood area  right next to his house, basically.  And according to him, Richard tries to unzip him.  At that point, he said, that's it.  He goes home.  He goes and talks to his mom, 12.30 a.m.  The mom in the bedroom was saying,  mommy, mommy, mommy, a queer hit on me.  It doesn't say any detail.  The mom says, oh my god.  He goes downstairs.  He called the police.  The Berkeley police, it's Saturday night at 12.30.  Five minutes later, he's already there.  The policeman picks up the guy, this minor,  on the police car.  They drive around, and Richard is there.  He's walking home because he was walking.  And they arrest him.  How can you believe this story?  It's incredible.  But he went all the way to the in front of a jury.  He was really risky.  He could have had his career and life ruined,  because had he been condemned and put in jail,  university wouldn't have hired him,  because at that time, that meant trouble.  Absolutely.  I mean, already as a gay man,  you were like under scrutiny.  Even the universities.  In other places, it was even worse.  I mean, like, you were discriminated.  You were not like, um, like all these places where you,  they require clearance.  They wouldn't give you clearance.  Because as a gay man, you were in a kind of weak position.  People could use that against you.  And so, but even the university, they didn't want trouble,  and so you were discriminated.  So they could have ruined his career.  And he was lucky enough that probably he got a good lawyer,  the case was so absurd, and then he had all the support  of the professor.  I mean, like, Alfred Tarski, his mentor from Berkeley,  everybody that knew him was like,  no, this was a, like this Polish man.  He would start talking, you could not do,  you can only do what he wanted.  He had this magnetic personality  with this heavy Polish accent.  He would be under his control.  It doesn't matter who he was talking to.  He could have talked to the president,  like the chancellor of the university,  or the man that was delivering the milk.  It doesn't matter.  Yet, like, there's personality.  They start talking, and you are, OK, there's  nothing else I can do.  So probably he's affected.  And all the other professors I went to talk to with the DA  helped.  But one of these professors, who was still alive,  and was not able to interview somebody else,  interview for another book, tells this anecdote in the recordings that were left  about Richard.  The DA says, OK, guys, I understand.  This is a genius.  He talked to me.  He said, look, I understand he's a genius.  I heard this from you guys.  And I'm willing to consider that.  But somebody has to tell him that he cannot talk to me  in that way.  When I talk to him, you know what he says?  He looks at me.  So now it's Richard with 23, OK?  Talking to the DA that probably was 50  and could have ruined his life.  So this kid, Richard, looks and says, look,  where's the problem?  The problem is not in me.  The problem is in you and the society.  But Richard learned his lesson.  From that moment on, he did not have  any legal trouble of any kind. Again, learned the lesson, learned his lesson. From that moment on, he did not have any legal trouble of any kind.  Again, learned the lesson, learned his technique,  and said, OK, I risk.  And he took risks probably until the very end.  But he built the system in such a way  that legal issues were not involved.  So this was happening.  That's what I mean, because on top of everything,  this was happening exactly when Richard was hired,  was designing the new season, performing the first concerts,  on top of teaching the classes at Berkeley,  on top of writing his dissertation.  Yet, in the middle of this major trial, they could have ruined  it.  Jeez.  So the question was, sorry if I like,  but this is something that really makes me very.  So do you think that, that's my question for you, had your father heard about this,  do you think this could have affected...  His employment?

default: 0:45:53-0:45:54
 Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 0:45:54-0:45:55
 No.

SPEAKER_01: 0:45:55-0:46:30
 Okay.  No.  No.  Because it sounds very unlikely to me that your father didn't know anything about this,  because come on, this guy is arrested and then he has to go to trial, you know?  Sure, and it's in Oakland, it's happening in Oakland, it's not happening in like Riverside because come on this guy is arrested and then he has to go to trial you know sure  and it's in Oakland it's happening in Oakland it's not happening in Riverside or Bakersfield  well if it wouldn't surprise me that dad knew he was gay yeah I wouldn't be  surprised at all yeah I mean yeah so you think that it would be it would it be  possible I think it's possible I think it's possible. I think it's probably likely. Dallas was never a judgmental person.

SPEAKER_00: 0:46:30-0:46:44
 And I truly believe he impressed me by being a type of man  that if you told him something, then it stayed with him.

SPEAKER_01: 0:46:44-0:47:00
 If he knew something,  excuse me, he would not bring it up.  He would allow you to bring it up to him.  As far as he was concerned,  you were who you were sitting in front of him.

SPEAKER_00: 0:47:00-0:47:10
 He was a great guy.  Good minister. He was a great guy.  Good minister.  Really good minister.

SPEAKER_01: 0:47:10-0:50:02
 Because I think one sign, I think,  that Richard had a special relationship  in this community is that he did not  keep material from any other community he played in.  In the very same way as his archive,  he had a folder of church activities,  but it was only with your father.  He had worked for the previous five years,  but he didn't keep any of those experiences.  Maybe it's just a random fact, but how random can it be?  So my impression is that his level of commitment, first  of all, this was also the church where  he had more responsibilities and a higher title.  But also, in the previous churches,  right before joining his last one,  where he was directing the choir, was playing the organ.  But there was something special in this community,  like the amount of commitment and creativity,  designing the  programs. My impression is that he felt at home. There was that little party for him  when he left in like early January in 1955. So that's why I was trying to understand what  kind of community he was in, because from his side, it looked like that he was enjoying  that community. It wouldn't surprise me that dad is a very organized guy who  would somehow get you to do things you didn't think  you wanted to do and be joyous in doing it.  And so I bet you he had a hand in seeing Richard's talent  and getting that directed in different ways.  That wouldn't surprise me at all.  And Richard must have been, from talking  to the people that knew him on the different aspects,  he sounds like one of those personalities  that you see the intensity and you see the gift and say, wow.  I mean, intellectually, for sure.  I have various weaknesses about that.  But I was also able to find people  that remember his playing. for sure, I mean I have various weaknesses about that, but I was also able to find people that  remember his playing. Unfortunately, nobody who has heard him playing the organ, because by the time they got to know him, he was not playing the organ anymore,  but so because he had moved to Los Angeles, and Los Angeles he performed his last concert, it was 1956, and then he stopped.  But at home he had an harpsichord and he played, you know, piano. And so there, in particular,  a student, an undergraduate at UCLA, who became close to him, was also studying. Like he had been  studying piano for the, he was maybe 19, he had studied piano since he was four.  And he got to know Richard as a young teacher,  and they started playing piano together  in the music room at UCLA.  And he told me, well, you know,  I stopped around that time to play piano  because I knew that I was good.  I was good, but not good enough to, you know,

SPEAKER_00: 0:50:02-0:50:03
 arrive at those levels.

SPEAKER_01: 0:50:03-0:50:45
 I said, I don't have enough, that kind of career. But I was good. And not good enough to arrive at those levels. I said, I don't have enough, that kind of career.  But I was good.  And I was able to judge.  And Richard could have participated  in high-level competitions.  Had he won, I don't know.  But he could have definitely been  admitted to high-level competitions.  Technically, he was perfect.  And sometimes, it would also be with a little bit of passion.  Does he play the organ at all in LA?  Yes.  So I know for sure that I have at least  the program of these events in one of the actually major  churches in LA for a concert that he gave in,  so I think it was like either the end of 55 or the beginning  of 56.  You know what church?  I can send you the information.

SPEAKER_00: 0:50:45-0:50:46
 I don't remember now off the top of my head.

SPEAKER_01: 0:50:46-0:50:55
 I'm just curious because one of the great church organs  in the whole world is First Congregational  at 6th and Commonwealth, near downtown.

SPEAKER_00: 0:50:55-0:50:59
 I think there are a number of churches.  I know that it was towards the downtown area.  I'll send you that one.  I'm going to check the program.

SPEAKER_01: 0:50:59-0:51:23
 It's a monster organ.  You probably heard of the Crystal Cathedral, too.  They used to compete with each other  to be the largest church organs in the world.  And this is a Gothic church built in the 1920s.  They've got different portions of the organ all around,  matching twin five manual organ.  Council's one down here and one up in the balcony.  If you ever have a chance to go there and listen to a concert,  it's just incredible.

SPEAKER_00: 0:51:23-0:51:24
 So it wouldn't surprise me.

SPEAKER_01: 0:51:24-0:52:45
 You can tell me what you think.  I'll send you the program, and I'll send you the church.  I got in touch with the person that is currently the, what's  it called, the music rector of the church,  asking if there was any material from the past histories.  And look, there was this person that gave this concert.  And he said, unfortunately, probably the person that  knew him just recently passed away.  And they mentioned  his name.  And I couldn't find any.  I asked the elderly in the church,  and they don't remember that.  But I also asked him to take a look at the program  that he performed.  And he said, well, a good organist  is able to perform that.  What surprised me is that this guy was not an organist.  You know what?  It was a professor. Performing that, that's not what you expect.  Like, you know, it's like this is a professional organist  at a good level, would have this kind of program,  but not an amateur.  And probably Richard was not an amateur.  It was just another one of these personalities.  But then, you know, he was human.  So probably once he moved to LA, he  realized that he couldn't focus on everything.  And that's also probably when he starts focusing on money.  So he started investing.  So part of the time probably was spent  in analyzing the stock market, probably  he had some algorithms that would measure things.  I'm sure that he'd know in his mind.  So the sense is that then this probably the community  that your father had created was a very well-counted community  where he probably felt at home.  He felt safe. I was at home. He felt safe.

SPEAKER_00: 0:52:45-0:52:46
 I would think so.

SPEAKER_01: 0:52:46-0:53:08
 And stimulated.  And Richard was definitely somebody  like he had no problem to work and work hard,  as long as there were the possibility of doing things  and realizing things and getting things done,  and done in a good way, not in a kind of approximate way.  The way you describe him sounds like he'd  be a wonderful fit for that church at that  time.

SPEAKER_00: 0:53:08-0:53:12
 Absolutely.  Do you think Donna would know anything about?

SPEAKER_01: 0:53:12-0:54:07
 Well, let's see.  We're the same age, so she would have had the same type of memories that I did.  And he was gone, this is my dad's widow.  We were the same age by about three months difference.  So I don't know.  If your dad would have spoken of him to her.  I never thought about that.  It's possible. She was still there all that time until they got married and moved down  to Sacramento.  Because in 19... So you said that your dad heard about Richard's death in 1971.  I don't know where I heard or when I heard the stories or who from.  It was my dad or my brother or how... I just I don't have a recollection of hearing...  I just remember being startled by hearing it. But I think it was...  My sense is that it was not in the immediate time of his death.

SPEAKER_00: 0:54:07-0:54:08
 It was later.

SPEAKER_01: 0:54:08-0:55:59
 Yeah, I think I've heard this story later on, but I don't have a specific memory.  And so I had a question about the community.  So do you have a sense of how the community is doing now these days?  And in particular, how the existing community is related to the community in the 50s.  The reason why I'm asking this question is the following.  If this is one of those communities that  has kept some continuity with new members and so on,  but has kept some of the old members,  I was wondering if there is the possibility of trying  to reach out and see if any people that  would be like Richard's age at that time, 23, 20, 25, they may still  be around and a member of the community and may remember him.  So these would be people between your age and your father's age,  like Richard's age.  So these are people that now would be between the age of 80  to 90, essentially.  But on the other hand, if the community has changed  dramatically, like it has become a very different community,  then it becomes harder because probably nobody is really  related to that anymore.  There's only one name.  We went back to the Oakland church  to do some painting and stuff like this 10 years ago.  And the only name besides Ponder that I remember  was the last name of Holroyd.  They were a significant family there.  And I think she, Betty was her first name.  Betty Holroyd.  Now again, this has been a long time. It's now been over ten years since I've been there.  And she was an elderly person then.  But that's the only name I can come up with that registered with back in the 50s.  By then... That would still be alive or maybe alive.  Yeah, they might still be alive or still be at the church.  By then, the attendance at Sunday's service  was probably 25.

SPEAKER_00: 0:55:59-0:56:11
 That black family that went to the church,  they had a number of kids, right?  Yeah.  Wasn't there a story or something  about one of the kids still going to the church?

SPEAKER_01: 0:56:11-0:56:24
 Yes, and she was there.  Yeah, and she was a member.  She was still a member of the church.  Ponder was one.  There were two black families.  One last name was Ponder, and the other one.  Porter.  I've got something in here.  ponder, and the other one, I've got something in here. Talk amongst yourselves.

SPEAKER_00: 0:56:23-0:56:33
 Talk amongst yourselves.  Because this church was one that, if you grew up in it,  you pretty much stayed in it.

SPEAKER_01: 0:56:33-0:56:39
 That's the impression that I had from what you guys were saying.  She sent me some info.

SPEAKER_00: 0:56:39-0:56:57
 And even Whittier, first Christian,  where Dallas last preached, if you were born into the church,

SPEAKER_01: 0:56:57-0:57:44
 you stayed in the church until you died.  I mean, we're not in the same area,  but we're still a part of that church.  We still contribute to that church.  So that is our home church.  Matter of fact, it's fallen on some hard times.  It does a whole city block.  The church is a whole city block.  I mean, they have buildings for education and building  of just all kinds.  It's a big church.  So they've fallen on kind of hard times  because our parents are now gone.  We didn't necessarily follow the tradition  that our parents did.  So the younger generation is not there.

SPEAKER_00: 0:57:44-0:58:28
 So they're kind of struggling.  And there was a story where someone had moved back east  and was born and raised, born and reared in the church.  And when they had heard through the grapevine  that the church was up for sale.  And the people were, the person from Becky's,  was so upset that they called the one person  that they remembered as a Sunday school teacher, which  she happens to be in her 90s and still at the church,

SPEAKER_01: 0:58:28-0:58:40
 saying, who do they think they are selling my church?  They cannot sell my church.  It is my church.  And Oakland was like that as well.

SPEAKER_00: 0:58:40-0:58:49
 I don't know so much still because I know Whittier First has more members than Oakland

SPEAKER_01: 0:58:49-1:00:03
 does.  What I'm worried about Oakland, that's why I was wondering if you guys have any connection,  specific individual that could contact us, that area has changed dramatically in terms  of like cost of living  and people that can afford to live there.  With this major expansion of San Francisco,  and now probably that has affected  people that can live there.  So even if, let's say you are lucky enough,  you are an older person,  and you were lucky to buy a house there,  your children won't be able to buy a house there.  And so that inevitably forces family to move away,  and this dismantles the kind of infrastructure  and sense of community and community that was.  So I was a bit worried that, I don't know if Oakland  and that community in particular may be affected by that.  But I was just wondering if you guys know anybody  that is still there, not necessarily from that time.  It could be somebody who joined more recently  that you're in touch with, that I could contact and say,  is there anything, is there a bulletin that you guys have  for the people in the church?  Or are there like a...  Pondexter?  I'll come up with a name.  Okay.  And I'll get it to you.

SPEAKER_00: 1:00:03-1:00:04
 Was it Pondexter?

SPEAKER_01: 1:00:07-1:00:24
 No, it was more like Saunders. It was an S word as opposed to a P word like ponder.  I remember ponder specifically.  The other one was, I want to think it was, yeah, she was one of the kids.  Yeah.  About my age now.  I was this big family of six or seven or eight children.  I was going to show you this.

SPEAKER_00: 1:00:24-1:00:25
 I think she met.

SPEAKER_01: 1:00:25-1:00:27
 That's what I was talking about.  Oh yes, yes, yes, yes.

SPEAKER_00: 1:00:27-1:00:30
 I think she met, I met that girl.

SPEAKER_01: 1:00:30-1:01:03
 I think you did.  She sent us, when we were organizing this Miracle Day,  she sent us some photographs and a DVD  or something like that.  That's where I'm gonna come up with this.  It's in that room someplace.  And this must have been when, so when he was there, so we're talking about the late 50s  here, I'm trying to look at the, or maybe early 60s, what it was like, and trying to  see from the clothes that people are wearing.  Well this would have been during that time because by the time...  So your dad was there until...  58.  58, okay, so that's, because it looks to me like clothes from the 50s, the kind of hat,  the kind of skirt.

SPEAKER_00: 1:01:03-1:01:05
 That is doctoral.  So until 1958, okay, so you guys left just three years after Richard left. because it looks to me like clothes from the 50s, the kind of hat, the kind of skirt. That is doctoral.

SPEAKER_01: 1:01:05-1:01:16
 So until 1958, okay, so you guys left  just three years after Richard left.  Yeah, and we went to...  Do you remember why your father left?

SPEAKER_00: 1:01:16-1:01:17
 What do you want to do?

SPEAKER_01: 1:01:17-1:01:21
 The reason Richard moved around,  bigger church, more money.

SPEAKER_00: 1:01:21-1:01:22
 More money.  I see, I see.

SPEAKER_01: 1:01:22-1:01:56
 But you see then in 1968 the Oakland church called  him back oh so he had two tenures there yes he would there in 1950 when put in  1958 in 1968 he went back to Oakland and stayed the minister there until Eschaton  hired him as the president and they moved to Sacramento and he was there for  15 or 20 years. I see.  And then he moved back down south  and did 10 or 15 interims around the states,  Southern California area until he was probably 89.

SPEAKER_00: 1:01:56-1:01:57
 Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 1:01:57-1:02:08
 Wow.  I think he had his episode.  His heart surgery, he was 89.  Yeah.  And never quite recovered from it.  But he did his last interim all over Southern California.  Wow.

SPEAKER_00: 1:02:08-1:02:22
 He did at the Leisure World.  He was the minister at the Leisure World.  So he never stopped to visit?  No, no.  He was so good.  If that man could make a buck, he'd make a buck.  He's up in heaven making a buck.  I know that man.

SPEAKER_01: 1:02:22-1:02:48
 That too, but he was just really good at his job.  And he clearly liked it because otherwise,  you know, you're at a certain point, you stop.  And he was really good, great preacher.  In fact, I have a whole raft of VCR tapes of his sermons.  For a number of years in the Whittier church,  they recorded him on videotape.  And so I've got, I don't know, 30 or 40 or 50 of his sermons.

SPEAKER_00: 1:02:48-1:02:50
 They gave you all of them and we...

SPEAKER_01: 1:02:50-1:02:52
 No, I took them.  Well, Ellie gave it to you.

SPEAKER_00: 1:02:52-1:02:55
 She says it's better if I say I gave it to you.

SPEAKER_01: 1:02:55-1:02:57
 Here's some new tapes, I'll take those old ones.

SPEAKER_00: 1:02:57-1:02:59
 They were taping over them.  Oh my God, don't do that.

SPEAKER_01: 1:02:59-1:03:04
 No, why do you do that?  Come on, at that point.  That's horrible.  I mean, just for some tape.  I mean, you can take a look at the pictures.

SPEAKER_00: 1:03:04-1:03:05
 Oh, absolutely. Oh, yeah. That's that? Come on, at that point. That's horrible. Just for some taste.

SPEAKER_01: 1:03:05-1:03:09
 Do you mind if I take a look at the pictures?  Oh, absolutely.  Oh, yeah.  That's what we're here for.

SPEAKER_00: 1:03:09-1:03:20
 I can't find any of those that you, um...  Any what?  That you had.  Um, I thought you sent him some of...

SPEAKER_01: 1:03:20-1:03:29
 Yeah, it's all in this stack right here.

SPEAKER_00: 1:03:35-1:03:44
 See, I don't have too many from that era. I get scats from later on.  Huh, this is a letter to Richard, or note to Richard it looks like. This is something you would have sent me, right?

SPEAKER_01: 1:03:44-1:03:48
 Oh.  I think so.

SPEAKER_00: 1:03:48-1:03:49
 That's the one that I, yeah, yeah, yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 1:03:49-1:04:16
 It's the one that I plan to send you,  yeah, this time on Sunday,  but that would be another reference.  Yeah, this might, it looks like,  yeah, I think I sent it to you to say,  Berkeley, see, it's January 2007.  It's another paper that looks like that, kind of washed out from printing.  Like the program or something like that, you sent several things over.  Oh!  Email that printed out.

SPEAKER_00: 1:04:16-1:04:32
 This is to John Nichols Roldenberg. I thought it was to your dad, to your brother.  And I was going, John, I love you like a younger brother or son I told you that Friday night that for me yeah you need to get out of yourself

SPEAKER_01: 1:04:32-1:05:19
 must find another way to communicate Johnny your bullheadedness might be precluded  communication when you have made up your mind about something that's the way it's  gonna be our difficulties are not in painting walls or mandate things like that, but in our lack of ability  to speak, what's really going on.  You said you really wanted to tell me.  You said you really wanted me to tell you  what I perceive as the truth in our relationship,  and this is it, John.  You must get past yourself.  This is what we're having our hard times.  He was a minister at the church here in Stockton  that we attended for a while.  So Mark, can I ask you about the structure of the church?  So where was the organ in the church?

SPEAKER_00: 1:05:19-1:05:20
 It was like up here?

SPEAKER_01: 1:05:20-1:05:28
 It was back here.  Oh, in the back.  The choir loft.  The choir loft, okay, it has that kind of structure.  In fact, uh.  So don't think I can.

SPEAKER_00: 1:05:28-1:05:32
 How about the regional office in Oakland?  Would they have anything?

SPEAKER_01: 1:05:32-1:06:22
 Maybe.  Yeah.  OK.  See, actually you can't see because all the people  are standing that way.  Yeah, but it's behind basically.  What we did also, see here's, this is wooden wall, and that's where the organ console was.  In the 70s we cut that like that and like that, so you could remove it and you could see the console when there was a concert thing done.  The organ pipes were up here and here and then on the sides.  Did you ever get inside the church?  No, because it was closed.  We've gone by there several times recently because we had to make a trip to Oakland and  it's kind of sad.  It says, what is it, community center or something like this?  Peace center.  Peace center.  Sort of a hand sign.

SPEAKER_00: 1:06:22-1:06:25
 Yeah it is, and your apartment in the bottom of the

SPEAKER_01: 1:06:25-1:08:15
 church? Yeah I was I was a janitor there for a while I had an apartment in the  church and it was seven stories tall. You know how the hill goes back like this? From that point, the lowest point up to where dad's study was under the  under the tower there. It was seven stories tall. I knew every nook and cranny of that.  I could go through that church blindfolded.  That area has changed quite a bit.  People that live there now are very different.  And so the entire sociology.  Yes.  And there is much less of it.  My impression is that there are lots  of people whose life rotates around San Francisco, and much more than it used to be.  And the cost of living has increased dramatically  in that area.  It has become the expansion of San Francisco.  And probably that changes the kind of people that it's been.  When we moved from Piedmont to Whittier,  the church decided to sell the parsonage.  This would have been in 68.  No, no, when dad came back, we still  moved back into the church, into the parsonage in Piedmont.  When he joined up with Eschaton, then the church  decided to sell the parsonage.  This would have been in 1972, three.  And they sold this little bitty house for like $27,000.  Three story house, three or four thousand square feet.  On the wrong side of the tracks might even be much, because this is a small house, right?  That house is at least a million dollars.  At least a million dollars.  I was probably in some of those pictures.  My mom did the... She directed the little bitty kids.  The little bitty ones have bows and the next step up have different kind of bows.

SPEAKER_00: 1:08:15-1:08:20
 One thing Mark's family never did was write on the back of pictures. If you

SPEAKER_01: 1:08:20-1:08:30
 find anything on the back of the picture... Somebody else. Somebody else wrote on it.  I noticed.  And although it's a good habit, because it helps you.

SPEAKER_00: 1:08:30-1:08:36
 Well, my family taught me always to write  on the back of the pictures who they are, where it was.  I will remember that.

SPEAKER_01: 1:08:36-1:08:50
 And then, of course, you're going to.  Yeah, of course.  So my great nieces and nephews now,  when they see a picture of their granny goose,  they know that's their granny goose.  It's important, because that's part  of the value of the picture.  If you don't know who's in that picture,  how can you connect to the picture?

SPEAKER_00: 1:08:50-1:08:51
 Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 1:08:51-1:08:52
 Yeah, I don't know.

SPEAKER_00: 1:08:52-1:08:55
 That person kind of looks like someone I know.

SPEAKER_01: 1:08:55-1:09:27
 Yes, he could be.  Humans, humans.  The only thing, the memory's there.  what is there? This was 55, when originally? January 55. So he probably wouldn't be in this picture. Yeah because it was very very early. How do you know it was 1955? This actually, January 22, 1955, official board.

SPEAKER_00: 1:09:27-1:09:36
 Yeah, he had just left.  I told you, someone else wrote on it.  There's something on the back.

SPEAKER_01: 1:09:36-1:10:42
 Now as far as photographs go, I think I mentioned this before, it may be impossible, but Arthur  O'Dell Studios in Oakland on Grand, was kind of like our official photographer.  Yes.  Yes.  And I don't know if they still exist.  And if they do, that might be a source  for getting other pictures.  OK, actually, let me check.  Because I also wonder if the pictures,  if it doesn't exist anymore, if they've  been donated to some other archive.  Because sometimes photographers do that.  For example, here in Stockton,  Bank of Stockton has a very beautiful photography archive  that has been created mainly by them acquiring  and archiving material from one or two  important photographers that Stockton had.  And when they died  the families were not willing to  take care of photography, pictures take time and money  And so they were like, they found a good compromise at a relatively cheap price  They were able to get all those beautiful pictures of Stockton in the 1910, 1920, 1930

default: 1:10:47-1:10:49
 So I got some pictures of of the area where Walter was living. Oh, there's one.

SPEAKER_00: 1:10:49-1:11:10
 Do we know?  I wish I could remember the name of that black family.  Because I think she would still be there.  That's Bird.  Have you tried the Oakland regional office at all?

SPEAKER_01: 1:11:10-1:12:14
 All the churches have a regional office that they report to.  They report in terms of what kind of connection they may have with the regional office. Okay, explain to him what the regional office is.  The denomination is basically autonomous church congregations,  but they all have a regional office.  This would be Northern California and Nevada.  Southern California is Southern California.  But the regional office must still be in Oakland not  positive but it's Christian Church Disciples of Christ Northern California  Nevada mm-hmm thank you probably Google it if you didn't say something Christian  Church and the problem is going to be in the ASA in Oklahoma. I believe so. OK, I'll check.

default: 1:12:15-1:12:21
 That was 93.

SPEAKER_01: 1:12:22-1:13:34
 It looks more. I need a ball. Actually, Mark, I have another question for you.  Based on your experience and what you know about First Christian Church in general, if  you're an organist and a choir director in a church, are you expected to be a member of the community in the sense, are you expected to be a member of the community in the sense,  are you expected to be a believer?  Like a-  No.  No, there is not such an expectation.  I wouldn't think so, no.  OK.  So it's possible, for example, for you  to work as an organist for a church  and not being part of the community in the sense  that you are not, you don't have that kind of faith.  I think that's probably universal with music  at a church in general.  Like right now, I'm the soloist at the Christian Science  Church in Loda.  And I'm not a member, and I don't have any beliefs.  So they don't expect you to be.  When it comes to it, and a lot of people  who are members or singers at, say, the Presbyterian Church,  because their service is on Friday,  would also be a cantor at the Jewish temple.  I see.  OK.  So that sort of thing just-  It's part of your job.

SPEAKER_00: 1:13:34-1:13:35
 Yeah.  It's a profession.

SPEAKER_01: 1:13:35-1:13:46
 You're performing like-  Right.  Right.  Hey, little boy.  Hey, little boy.  You like it? Little boy. Hey little boy. Hey little boy. Hey little boy. Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.

default: 1:13:46-1:14:04
 Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.  Hey little boy.

SPEAKER_01: 1:14:04-1:16:52
 Hey little boy. Hey little boy. Hey little boy. Hey little boy. Hey little boy. Okay. This is way off subject really, but just in case you'd like to take a look, that's the  Whittier Church.  Ah, okay, yeah, I'm curious.  That's where your father moved right after, which is, yeah, it looks even bigger.  It's a big place.  You know, it just really wasn't, except you say he didn't play the organ much when  he moved down south.  It wouldn't surprise me that the Gladsons and Richard somehow  crossed paths at the time or two.  Maybe he came to that church and played or something.  I have no idea.  But I know that.  So for how long was your father at this church?  10 years. 10 years. So from the 60s. I know that... So for how long was your father at this church?  Ten years.  Ten years. So from...  Well, I mean, I... it's not unlikely.  I know my brother, who is 76 this year.  The sense is that my brother and he had a good relationship.  Richard was born in what year?  In 1930.  30, so he had been 10 years older than Carson.  Well actually, so Richard,  this year, in September Richard would turn 86.  So nine years of difference.  So Richard was nine years,  which means that when Richard was there, age Richard was 23, 24,  your brother, that's your brother,  is that correct, was basically 14, 15.  Right.  And the sense I have is that Carson admired him.  Oh, so he remembers that?  Oh, yeah.  Well, I've talked to Carson about this for decades.  All this work in here is my brother's. All the paintings hanging in his house are his.

SPEAKER_00: 1:16:52-1:17:09
 Oh, so he's a painter. Yeah, painter. He's a professor, now retired, but he taught at  Northridge for a number of years, then he went to that great big junior college near the

SPEAKER_01: 1:17:09-1:17:17
 coast.  Which part, northern California?  I'm sorry, Southern California.  Off the 405, going toward the ocean.  Oh, in LA?  Yeah.  I mean like...  El Camino.

SPEAKER_00: 1:17:17-1:17:18
 El Camino, yeah, yeah, yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 1:17:18-1:18:08
 He was there for about 30 years.  And he still has, he's got terrible problems with his hands now, he's got a lot of problems  with his hands.  He's got a lot of problems with his hands.  He's got a lot of problems with his hands.  He's got a lot of problems with his hands.  He's got a lot of problems with his hands. He's got a lot of problems with his hands. He's got a lot of problems with his hands. He's got a lot of, yeah, yeah. He was there for about 30 years.  And he still is... he's got terrible problems with his hands now,  but he does a lot of stuff on the computer now.  But virtually everything that's hanging on the walls here is his art.  So, sorry, I just want to be sure that...  you said that you have not talked to him for 10 years?  I haven't talked to him for about three years.  Okay.  I don't know if that would be... You might have a way of getting more of a sense from Carson about that.  I think he lives on Palm Springs someplace.  What you could do is go to carsongladson.com.

SPEAKER_00: 1:18:08-1:18:11
 Oh, it's a website.  Oh, perfect.  I didn't know that.

SPEAKER_01: 1:18:11-1:18:31
 OK.  Yeah, no, I just mentioned, if you prefer what I said,  from my archival researches, it turns out  that Richard Montague was the committee where your father was.  Do you happen to remember, if you don't want to?  No, no, that's fine.  It's not that I don't.  We have a falling out that we haven't fixed up yet.  No, no, I understand.

SPEAKER_00: 1:18:31-1:18:41
 Those things happen.  But you can tell him you're talking to his child.  Absolutely.  Can I mention your name?  Otherwise, I'll keep it to street.  No, no, absolutely.  OK, so his name is Carson.  Carson Lee Ladson.

SPEAKER_01: 1:18:41-1:19:26
 And the website is under his name.  Yes. Is it CarsonLadson.com or CarsonBLadson.com?  Well I can check both actually. If it's one of the two then...  Yeah it's gotta be one of the two. Okay. CarsonLadson.com. I know that his eldest daughter posted a letter about him about a year ago.

SPEAKER_00: 1:19:26-1:19:29
 It was very touching, actually, very nice.

SPEAKER_01: 1:19:29-1:19:41
 As long as you know he's still doing okay, then?  You said he had some, like, it was arthritis?  He's got Parkinson's disease and a couple other ailments that have really slowed him  down.

SPEAKER_00: 1:19:41-1:19:48
 My sister, I kind of doubt that.

SPEAKER_01: 1:19:48-1:20:33
 See, Carson was very musical too.  He played the piano and was very interested in that sort of thing.  I guess at the age he was already studying.  If he played the piano he had already started.  Because if you're 14...  He was never professional at it, but he always admired and loved music.  So there's a connection, just a musicus connection  with Richard, I'm sure.  I'm always positive of that.  And so as far as you know,  since you said that he's not doing too well  as far as health is concerned,  do you think he still checks his website?  Like, because you know.  Yes, I think so.  You think so?  Yeah.  It like, does it look like the,  like the website, there are like signs that the website has been modified  or been active recently?  I can't even turn the computer on.

SPEAKER_00: 1:20:33-1:20:34
 I'll have to ask Jeannie.

SPEAKER_01: 1:20:34-1:20:49
 OK, I can do it.  I'll check.  Or like, do you happen to have, in case this doesn't work,  do you happen to have like in case this doesn't work, do you happen to have your, you mentioned  a niece, your niece's contact information?

default: 1:20:49-1:20:52
 I don't know.

SPEAKER_00: 1:20:52-1:20:58
 I think she still lives in Pasadena.

SPEAKER_01: 1:20:58-1:22:06
 So this is a beautiful picture with the tree and the church.  Really nice.  You can tell, okay, this was...  I guess this is still church  building. It looks like a generation. This was the ladies parlor in the original  construction. This was modified in the late 60s early 70s to build a chapel.  Very beautiful chapel stained glass and stuff like this. Well you can tell that this is  1956 or 7. That's it looks like a 7 to me and that's a 6. I see. I used to know all these by heart.  Wow, impressive. That looks like a 57 Chevy.  I only know that we are talking about late 50s here because I from the cars, but I don't know I don't go the level of precision that you...  I'm older than you too. So I remember. Well, you know, this is knowledge. This is knowledge that you have that I don't.  I remember you sent me this. This is a beautiful picture of your mom. Yeah isn't that sweet? Yeah that's very nice.  And this I think there's a date on the back of it. So 1958. Okay July this is probably one of  dad's last Sundays because we would have moved in September. That's true. To start in September  after vacation time. Oh it's full. It was always full.

SPEAKER_00: 1:22:06-1:22:11
 Always full.  They want to take another look at this.

SPEAKER_01: 1:22:11-1:22:51
 In Whittier, when we first started going there,  they had two services.  That sanctuary seated about 1,100.  And the late service, which is always 1030, 1045,  there was no room left.  So they started an 815 service,  and the high school choir sang at that service.  Yeah, this is way too late for Richard.  All the ladies wore hats.  He knew it was summertime when Dad would stand up  in the pulpit and say that the gentlemen  could take off their coats.

SPEAKER_00: 1:22:54-1:22:57
 Of course most of the men wore hats but there was always a hat rack in the back.

SPEAKER_01: 1:23:03-1:24:46
 Can I ask you Mark, I'm curious about this, so is this a special celebration for something? Like, see that people are drinking some tea  and eating something, or is it like a regular gathering  or something like after the Sunday service?  Do you have a sense of what that could have been?  Because this is really a banquet.  Clearly this is something, you know,  it looks like a banquet.  Yes.  But that's, I wonder if it was a tradition of some like.  We used to always have a coffee hour after church.  This was in the fellowship hall,  which is directly below the sanctuary.  There's also a large room on the same level as the sanctuary.  Is this the room in here?  That's me.  That's you?  No, that's not me.  That's you?  No, that's not me.  There's dad back there.  That's what I thought, yeah.  I thought that was your dad. Somebody made a collage because I cut a picture out of here. Yeah I think the  collage is in here. I think you're right. Dad made that thing right there I think.  So someone's picture belongs there. Oh there I am that's me. That you yeah with the glasses on yeah that's him how old were you here i was uh  probably seven or eight yeah i started wearing glasses when i was three you look very professional  with your jacket i mean look at that oh he was a pk typical pk i was the one that would go into  one of the restrooms and lock the stall door and then crawl under. Really pissed off the janitor. And I don't know if you're familiar with  with our... we had... the Disciple of Christ had communion every Sunday. It's grape  juice, you know, and there's always a room where you can go and prepare it.  And I would sneak in there out of church service and drink all the grape juice that was left over. He would get in trouble for it and he wouldn't understand why.

SPEAKER_00: 1:24:46-1:24:56
 Why?  Because he used to throw it away.  Yeah, exactly.  Probably because your mama was afraid you might get someone's disease from sipping the cup.

SPEAKER_01: 1:24:56-1:24:58
 Yeah.  Let's see.

SPEAKER_00: 1:24:58-1:24:59
 Let's see.

SPEAKER_01: 1:24:59-1:25:37
 I'm looking for that family.  Here's the Black family right here.  Oh, you can see them?  Yeah. I can't Black family right here. Oh, you can see them? Yeah.  I can't think of her name. I'll come up with it. I'll find it and I will get it to you.  Oh, that's your dad? Yeah. This is the... Yeah, that's the one you're most interested in. Yeah, yeah. I want to make a copy with my scanner, but do you know who is this person? His name is Halsey  Davis. Yeah. So was he somebody in the church?  Oh yeah, he would have been one of the bigwigs in the church.  Probably chairman of the board and stuff like that.  Yeah, because it looks like this is like 1955, the annual meeting that they had.  Here's an interesting story that Dad told us.

SPEAKER_00: 1:25:37-1:25:39
 Here you are again.

SPEAKER_01: 1:25:39-1:27:03
 That's the one, yes.  That's the one with the picture.  That's the picture, yes. That's the one. That's the one. That's the picture, yeah. That's the picture with the hole.  Yes.  We were at, you remember the dinner we had at the Magic Castle that Dad and Donna went  to?  And this, I think, is the place where Dad told me this story about Halsey Davis.  That Halsey, this big, stern, vital guy, was gay.  And he told Dad this in oh and so decades I mean this was much  later much much later well I don't know no I think this was during the time  because yeah yes but dad didn't tell us this story until then until 2000 or  something like that and it was just startling because this guy was not a  feminine at all he was he. He was a family man.  Do you know if he had a family? Oh yeah. Altsy Davis.  And you feel pretty comfortable in thinking that he played a major role in the church?  Oh yeah, absolutely. So he was one like somebody having an active role in the church.  In fact, his picture is probably... Can I ask you, I don't know much about the organization  of the church, like how does it work? So is there some sort of board that deals with the financial  aspect? There's an official board. Uh-huh. From 1955. Do you think he's going to be there? Oh yeah, I'm serious.

SPEAKER_00: 1:27:05-1:27:10
 So there is a board... Why don't you turn the light on, you probably could see a lot better. I think that's him right there.

SPEAKER_01: 1:27:11-1:27:56
 I think that's him right there. Yep, it looks like his face. Yep, you're totally right.  Yep, that's him. So the organization of the church is that  the board directs the church and its finances and all kinds of other  things. They hire the minister and the minister is an employee who may stay for  a long long time, may move on to another church or whatever. That's entirely up to  the congregation. Like the Methodists... And the minister too. Right. In the Methodist Church, the local, not the local, but the synod or whatever you want  to call it, will assign a minister to that church.

SPEAKER_00: 1:27:56-1:27:57
 Like every three years.

SPEAKER_01: 1:27:57-1:28:13
 I see.  I see.  In the Disciples Church, it's really the community that decides.  Yes.  They have a search, they look at candidates and then they decide.  Once you hire a minister, can you also decide to terminate the relationship?  Yes.

SPEAKER_00: 1:28:13-1:28:14
 It's a contractual thing.

SPEAKER_01: 1:28:14-1:28:34
 It's a contractual thing, so it's on both sides.  So this board will be elected for a year and they would then internally elect the chairman  and the treasurer and all the rest of that.  If you have a really strong minister, then you can play, I guess.

SPEAKER_00: 1:28:34-1:28:35
 Sure, of course.

SPEAKER_01: 1:28:35-1:29:48
 Dad was a very strong personality.  And so certain people would be on the board.  And whatever he wanted, usually they said yes.  Well, but it's an advantage on both sides. If you have a very dynamic minister,  then as a board, it's your advantage,  and you see that he's doing good things for the community,  then it's your advantage to give him more space.  I mean, like why, just because the idea comes from you  instead of coming from us,  that doesn't mean that it's a bad idea.  So it's a very, but I like this.  I mean, I'm not a member of any church,  but as an Italian, I was born and I grew up  in the Catholic tradition, which is a very different one.  I mean, like everything comes from the top.  And you know, the priest of a community  is decided from the top, he can be removed at any time,  it's not up to you, and decisions concerning the church  are not involved, you know, they don't affect you unless you are, but even in terms of like what you can do, you can give donations, that's  what you can do, but you don't participate to administration of the church.  The church is property of the Catholic Church, the land, the building, and so, and the priest  that administer the church has a certain amount of responsibility, but even him is not directly involved.

SPEAKER_00: 1:29:48-1:30:08
 The land and the building of the disciples' church, if a particular church folds, then the church and the building and the land goes to the regional office or to the national office  and they decide what to do.

SPEAKER_01: 1:30:08-1:31:03
 Sure, sure. But it sounds like, for example, the fact that the community can choose its own minister.  That's a fantastic thing, because it puts you like, okay, we are evaluating based on who we are,  what kind of personality, what kind of person and group fits us better. And then if things change, I remember stories from my childhood of priests that nobody could  stand.  And there was just a damage.  And there's nothing you can do about it.  No, there's nothing.  There's nothing.  At the very same time, actually, this is even a more common story, priests that have been  able to build a very, very great community, like doing things, connection, enlarging.  And people were involved, both in terms of socializing,  but also emotionally.  And all of a sudden, the Vatican decides  that this priest has to be moved to the opposite side of Italy.  That's it.  And I remember, like, petition, request, nothing.  Nothing.

SPEAKER_00: 1:31:03-1:31:03
 And this could be.

SPEAKER_01: 1:31:03-1:31:47
 So they came down.  Yeah, yeah. Totally see the power up and you are  left like, I mean, you know, this is a man that has played a major role in my family  developing my children for the past 10-15 years and all of a sudden you take him away.  I don't know why, nothing is said, he has like I think a few months to live back.  So can I ask you, how would you spell it? I have a hard time reading the handwriting so it's Paris like in the middle of the city. Halsey. Okay so H-A-L-S-E-Y or S-Y.  And then Davis. Looks like H-A-L-S-E-Y. S-E-Y-L-C? Yeah.  And then can you read the last name?  Davis.

SPEAKER_00: 1:31:47-1:31:49
 Oh, Davis.  OK.  D-A-V-I-S.

SPEAKER_01: 1:31:49-1:31:58
 Davis.  Yeah, Davis.  LC Davis.  Is it correct?  It's either H-A or H-O.  OK.  OK.  All I know is it's got to be H-A.

SPEAKER_00: 1:31:58-1:31:58
 Really?

SPEAKER_01: 1:31:58-1:31:59
 I think so.

SPEAKER_00: 1:31:59-1:31:59
 OK.

SPEAKER_01: 1:31:59-1:32:00
 OK.  I'll put both of them.

SPEAKER_00: 1:32:00-1:32:05
 Do you see how it looks like it could be an O,  because it's up at the top?

SPEAKER_01: 1:32:05-1:32:20
 I'm almost positive.  OK.  Well, you would know better than I would.  Is it Carson Gladson dot com, Carson L. Gladson dot com,  or what?  Your brother?  Carson's website, yeah.  What are you calling it?

SPEAKER_00: 1:32:20-1:32:24
 Yeah, I think it's Carson Gladson dot com.

SPEAKER_01: 1:32:24-1:32:35
 I'll check that. Carson's name came up because he was closer in age to Richard.  And I know that he admired Richard  and had some sort of a friendship with him.  And I thought maybe he'd have some memories, too.

SPEAKER_00: 1:32:35-1:32:41
 Yeah, if your brother's capable of talking and stuff.

SPEAKER_01: 1:32:41-1:34:00
 Yeah, just don't know.  Let's see. 93. I forgot the wrong glasses on again.  So Mark, do you mind if I take a scan of this picture? Absolutely. Do you need to plug in?  Oh no, no, no, it's a portable one.  Okay. You can scan whatever you like.  Thank you. And I was thinking of scanning these two pictures  of the church. Absolutely, whatever you like. I have a question for you Mark. So this is  the room where you said there were like little receptions? This is the big hall.  Oh, this is the big hall.  It looks like a big one.  Was there something that was smaller than that one?  Yes.  Okay, because I was just wondering what was the place where they may have organized the  little gathering for Richard?  Like the...  Oh, boy.  Actually, maybe if I send you the program, you'll see, because I think they wrote...  It was something like this, yes. it was like a bulletin, and in the back, the last page,  I have it on a scan, it says, you know, gathering for Richard Montague, and maybe you can recognize  which place it was.  Oh, I'm sure I remember, yeah.  It looks like you knew the church very well, so.  On the back of my hand.  It's Carson Lee Gladsen.  Oh, Carson Lee Gladsen, okay.

default: 1:34:00-1:34:01
 Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 1:34:01-1:34:05
 And he also has a Facebook page. It's Carson Lee Gladsen. Oh, Carson Lee Gladsen.

SPEAKER_01: 1:34:05-1:34:06
 Yeah.

SPEAKER_00: 1:34:06-1:34:11
 And he also has a Facebook page.

SPEAKER_01: 1:34:11-1:34:17
 Is that where you read the letter from, who was it from?  From Hopie?

SPEAKER_00: 1:34:17-1:34:28
 From Hope.  No, it was from, I just Googled Carson Lee Gladsen and it came up Huffington Post article, Carson Lee Gladson.

SPEAKER_01: 1:34:28-1:35:52
 Oh, that's right, because he got a hold of a couple of pieces of software and manipulated them in such a way that he was an artist. Yes. And so he, because of his trembles, his shakes,  he could no longer hold a paintbrush.  Yes.  And so he got an iPad, I think, and manipulated it  so that he could continue doing his artwork.  Wow.  Some software that had a name.  It was Apple.  Apple.  Hope contacted Apple to say how grateful she was  that this saved her father's life, and so on and so forth.  And so Apple contacted Carson, and somehow they  got together and developed this new software  for Parkinson's disease.  Fantastic.  Yeah.  So that now can also be used by other people, not just by him.  Right.  Yeah, because you can imagine that, for example, you can imagine they can create a software  that can recognize what's the main line and gets rid of all the shaking.  You know, like if you do this, okay, that's what you want to do. that can recognize what's the main line and gets rid of all the shaking.  Like if you do this, okay, that's what you want to do.  Then maybe you have two or three options and then you can choose how you want to clean  up that line.

SPEAKER_00: 1:35:52-1:36:14
 Apparently, he did it with just a mouse, with the mouse, and was able to manipulate it.  And it was almost like it was inside his brain.  And it knew what he wanted.  And so it started, yeah.  He was a pretty good artist.

SPEAKER_01: 1:36:14-1:36:22
 So do you have a sense that he has posted on his Facebook page recently?  Just to have an idea if he's still able to communicate.

SPEAKER_00: 1:36:22-1:36:29
 I don't know.  It just says that this is Facebook.

SPEAKER_01: 1:36:29-1:36:35
 Because sometimes if you look at the Facebook page you can see if people have posted or  have had activities recently or not.

SPEAKER_00: 1:36:35-1:37:07
 Oh, yeah. I see. She was a brilliant lady herself.

SPEAKER_01: 1:37:07-1:39:26
 She had, she was in, in fact, it goes back to the early 1950s when she did her, had her  own TV show on Sunday afternoons.  There was a discussion group that she produced and directed in San Francisco.  Wow.  And it was on a local station there.  You said in the late 50s?  Yeah.  She was a precursor, was that it?  Yeah.  And she got her master's in drama at UCLA, at Castelli LA,  and went on to become a grapple analyst and grapple therapist for the last  34 years of her life. She wrote and published a book on grapple therapy. She is quite a  talent too. Drama put on plays and such. In fact, she and I, I don't know if you're familiar with the book Cry the Beloved Country.  It was turned into a musical  called Lost in the Stars.  It's a story about  this... So what's the title of the book again?  Cry the Beloved Country.  It's a brilliant book.  She excerpted the book  and put it in about a one hour form  and I excerpted  the musical.  And so we combined this, I would sing a cappella and she would read the story.  And we did, I don't know how many, we performed it 20, 30 times in various places in Southern  Canada.  It may have recorded.  When did you do this?  Like which period?  1990 in that area. The story is about a family, several families in South  Africa. The father is this priest in a very poor area and the son, Absalom, goes  into Johannesburg and gets into trouble. And he gets into serious trouble and he ends up killing somebody.  Somebody he kills happens to be the son  of this priest's very good and wealthy friend.  And they made a couple of movies out of it too  with Richard,  Richard, who played the white guy.  Richard who played the white guy. No.

SPEAKER_00: 1:39:26-1:39:30
 Oh, Bismarck.  Richard.

SPEAKER_01: 1:39:30-1:39:58
 Anyway, so he gets in trouble and the story surrounds this young kid's trial and going to jail.  Oh, so he gets found and arrested.  So the story is about...  So all this is a background. The actual story is about the trial?  Well, the trial is part of it, but not a major part of it.  Okay, I see.  But it's all leading up to him losing his way, finding his way, losing his way, and  he ends up being hanged.  Oh, oh, oh, wow.

SPEAKER_00: 1:39:58-1:40:07
 It was Photoshop that he used, an iPad with Photoshop.  Photoshop, I see.  That's what he did.  I see, I see. That's what he did. Yeah, I see.  So he could do the adjustments.

SPEAKER_01: 1:40:07-1:40:22
 So does it look like something that  has been posted recently, from what you understand?  It was Richard Harris and James Earl Jones.  Oh, yeah, the director.

SPEAKER_00: 1:40:22-1:40:33
 I think I know him.  Yeah, it was probably within the last five years, I guess.  What's your name?

SPEAKER_01: 1:40:33-1:40:40
 Carson.  Posted, I mean, Hopi's article.  The date was just last year.

SPEAKER_00: 1:40:40-1:40:42
 Oh, was it last year?

SPEAKER_01: 1:40:42-1:41:12
 Yeah, I'll try to write him and you know see if he replies.  If he wants to share anything. Does he still live in California? Yeah. Okay.  Palm Springs area I think. Oh okay. In the Southern California part. Now when you search him it's all of his, it's in Redondo Beach or Los Angeles.  Sure because probably all the places where he lived yeah. So lived. So it's good that he has his own website.  So at least, if you're still checking his email,  probably the website comes with an email.  And so I can try to...

SPEAKER_00: 1:41:12-1:41:22
 I'm pretty sure his email is...  Email?  Yeah, it's Carson...  It's CarsonLeighGladson  at AOL.com

SPEAKER_01: 1:41:22-1:41:24
 I'm pretty sure that's what it is.

SPEAKER_00: 1:41:24-1:41:38
 I'm pretty sure that is what it is. I don't think he would have changed it.  It's either Carson Lee Gladson at AOL.com or C. Gladson at AOL.com.

SPEAKER_01: 1:41:38-1:41:58
 I'll try at AOL.com.  I'm pretty sure that's the same.  C. Gladson.  You know that drawing that we have of his very first piece of artwork he ever did?  That would have been when Richard was at the church.  Oh, wow.  He was about 14 when he did that.  Oh.  So you have something that your brother did when he, like...  All the paintings that we have around here,

SPEAKER_00: 1:41:58-1:42:04
 except this one.  Yeah, it's a different style.  Yeah, it's him. Everything.

SPEAKER_01: 1:42:04-1:42:12
 Wow. So he was already painting then, when he was that young? This one. Yeah, it's a different style. Yeah, it's him. Everything.  So he was already painting then when he was that young?  Yeah.  I think this is the first thing that he ever did.

SPEAKER_00: 1:42:12-1:42:15
 He might have dusted off.  It was like a National Geographic or something  like that.

SPEAKER_01: 1:42:15-1:42:17
 OK, don't dust it off.  Let him get all dusty.

SPEAKER_00: 1:42:17-1:42:28
 That's OK.  Things that are not hung up on the wall,  I do not have a tendency to go through a closet and dust.

SPEAKER_01: 1:42:28-1:42:32
 I agree.  I mean, Charlie playing in the house, and I'm going to say,  you need to select.

SPEAKER_00: 1:42:32-1:42:33
 Yes.

SPEAKER_01: 1:42:33-1:42:33
 Wow.

SPEAKER_00: 1:42:33-1:42:34
 No, no.

SPEAKER_01: 1:42:34-1:43:21
 So that's just, you know.  I'm not.  I'm good at writing.  No, no, no.  But I'm a concealer.  But he's been in a number of different mediums,  you know, watercolor and oils and all kinds of things.  So he turned these interest to me.  And he was a professor.  Yeah, and then he had taught.  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, he was at the LA Museum of Art.  Oh, and there's parts where his art is hanging?  Yeah, and San Francisco.  San Francisco, there's some, San Francisco, LA, Long Beach.  There's a whole raft, or was, where  the head of the Long Beach port.  Port of Long Beach.  And their boardroom is a whole bunch of them.  Now, you know what?  When we first got in touch, I think I did a search about you.

SPEAKER_00: 1:43:21-1:43:25
 And you found nothing about him, but you found a lot about him.

SPEAKER_01: 1:43:25-1:44:31
 I was looking for Mark Gladsen.  And I don't know for which reason.  Now this comes to my mind.  I keep seeing all these pieces of art.  Because probably, the way Google searches,  that if this algorithm says Gladsen,  this is a certain area, probably your name  could have been associated in some documents  with the name of your brother. Maybe when they were talking about, you know,  Carson Gladstone coming from a family.  So then Google keeps all this track.  And so you had this, I remember, this species of artists.  Maybe that's a secondary activity,  because I knew that you were in music.  So I said, OK, you know, maybe that's the, now I understand.  So probably there was a, I'm going to go into the search  again now, I'm curious.  Yeah, it'll show.  Yeah, yeah, probably.  It'll show all of his...  Because I think it said like Gladsden, California, what did it do, Mark.  And so to have an idea.  Yeah.  And I said, oh, these pieces of art.  Yeah, it'll show. I've Googled.  Oh, you've done it. Yeah.  When I Google Carson, up comes Diane, which is their sister, and Mark, and then me, and Diane's husband.  That's how it works.

SPEAKER_00: 1:44:31-1:44:36
 When they say that big brother knows where you are, he knows where you are.

SPEAKER_01: 1:44:36-1:46:05
 Well, because for Google it's enough that there has been a document online where the names are put together.  If you are connected via Facebook, They have access to all this information.  Well, thank you. Thank you very much.  This is extremely rich and useful. I mean, like, I have some research to do.  But very useful. And, you know, it gave me definitely  a much better picture of the community. Now I feel a little bit more comfortable in writing that part.  Because now I better understand why I had those signs  from the research that I've done that that community was  different from the others as far as Richard was concerned.  Why he kept all this material.  And now you're telling me he stayed somehow in touch.  And while there was that celebration,  now it was possible that despite the difficult time  that he was going through at the beginning, it was still accepted in the community.  So that really helps.  And please, Mark, let me know if you can think about any name from the old time in the community  that you think it would be worth trying to contact and reach just as an attempt.  Sure.  I can venture that.  Absolutely.  I'll find those. A couple of names. We got the one Betty to. Absolutely. I'll find those.  A couple of names.  We've got the one Betty Haldroyd.  I don't know if she's still alive.  If she is, she's got to be into her mid-90s.  But this other family, the black family in the church, had old pastoral kids, and at  least two or three of them had got to be about my age.  And I know that they were there when I was there 10 years ago.

SPEAKER_00: 1:46:05-1:46:07
 And I know one of them still.

