AF: 0:00:01-0:03:57
A document that says "Your handwriting reveals you, a personal analysis of your handwriting by Muriel Stafford, handwriting psychologist" found in Tarski's archive and he obviously has sent in for ten cents to get his handwriting analyzed.

SF: [WHISPERING] That's not so obvious.

AF: That's not so obvious, Sol says, but he has..

SF: [WHISPERING] He might have checked it himself.

AF: Sol says he might have checked this himself.

At any rate, somebody analyzed his handwriting, either he sent it in officially or he did it himself, and he's checked his dispositions and emotions based on his handwriting and he has checked "calm, charming, discriminating, emotionally concentrated, goodnatured, selfconscious, sympathetic and well-balanced."

There's a category of weak points you're supposed to guard against and he has checked that he should guard against "set opinions" and "too critical."

The nature of your mind he's checked "artistic, conscientious, cultured tastes, creative, gifted, intuitive, level-headed, literary, logical," of course, "observant, orderly, neat, original and well concentrated."

As far as your character goes, he has checked "ambitious, dependable, kind, goodhearted, loyal, sincere, strong willed."

Let's note some of the things he's left out.

He's left out "gracious", he's left out "magnetic", he's left out "normally affectionate", he's left out "passionate", he's left out "pleasant", he's left out "poised."

He could have checked "romantic" and didn't.

What else might he have checked that he didn't check?

He might have checked "restlessness", he might have checked "too dominating." In guarding against weak points, he had the opportunity to check the following, which he did not check: "too dominating, stubborn, quick temper, pride, personal vanity", what else would have applied that he didn't check?

In terms of "in your mind", he checked the things he did not check were "critical."
He didn't check "energetic", which he certainly was.
He didn't check "forceful."
He didn't check "imaginative", but he did check, of course, "intuitive."
He checked "levelheaded", which of course he wasn't. "Ruled by feelings", "quick thinking" he did not check, but he probably felt he had covered it.
He didn't check "versatile", which he probably thought he was.

In terms of character, he very definitely checked "ambitious", which he certainly was.
"Courageous", he didn't check, and that's interesting, so he wasn't dishonest.
"Generous", he might have checked that, but I think he may have checked it elsewhere.
"High principles", he didn't check that, and I think he thought he had those.
"Humorous", he didn't give himself credit for a sense of humor.
He did check "kind" and "goodhearted," [UNINTELLIGIBLE] optimistic.
"Persevering", he certainly could have checked that and did not.
"Self-assured", he could have checked that.
Well, I think that's enough.

SF: 0:03:58-0:04:00
[WHISPERING] There's something on the back. Twenty-two items.

AF: 0:04:01-0:05:48
There are some items on the back about your that... that are headed "Your work."

The one he checked is number two, "You have a conscientiousness that makes you feel personally responsible for anything with which you are connected. Specialize: A profession such as accountant, doctor, teacher, engineer, or secretary are suggestions."

He also checked number fourteen. This is out of twenty two items, he checked these two: Two, about the conscientiousness and number fourteen: "You are a true artist with pronounced creative talent, uncanny intuition and much charm.
Put these gifts to work and you can write your own ticket [exclamation mark]"

There are lots of negative things in here he didn't check.
There's something about executive ability "You have definite executive ability", he didn't check that.
He didn't check-

SF:
Well I don't know that he has it.

AF:
All right.

SF:
Let others organize things.

AF:
Yeah but he still is an executive he could well he could delegate responsibility but he was certainly executive in creating this. Well, let's not argue about that on tape.


"Your natural aggressive-" number six "Your natural aggressiveness will be your greatest asset if you will combine a little tact with it. A good lawyer and a wonderful head for business" he didn't check

SF:
Number four.

AF:
Number four: "Since you must dominate and you allow nothing to stop you you try to find a position where others will accept and appreciate your domination. You really should be in business for yourself."
He probably didn't check those because they emphasize business and I don't think he wanted to be in business.

It is really interesting to know whether he checked these for himself or whether he actually sent off for this. Well...

[RECORDING CUTS OUT AND BACK IN]

One further detail on the handwriting analysis it says "This is the story of you outstanding traits are checked according to your handwriting" and then the categories are "Disposition and emotions" and then "Guard against these weak points your mind and your character."

[RECORDING CUTS OUT AND BACK IN]

Just to note that Tarski collected many many clippings about Montague's murder.
It obviously affected him very, very deeply.

We're going through things that we're going to copy but some of the things we're not copying are:
- Certificates from the American Academy of Sciences nominating him as a member
- From the National Academy of Sciences National Research Council nominating him, that he was from the National Research Council saying he's been chairman of the delegation to the Congress of Division of Logic and Methodology.
- Something from the British Academy saying he's being made a corresponding fellow of the British Academy.
- Something from the International Academy of Philosophy of Science nominating...well I don't know what that is, how about I put that in.

Is there something from the Dutch? Just a sec.