
Filename:  SC1206_b03_07_InaTarski_b.mp3
Date of interview: Oct 12 1993
Date of transcription:  Jun 24 2025
Transcriber:  Mark Simmons
AF: Anita Feferman
IT: Ina Tarska

--- BEGIN TRANSCRIPTION ---


AF: 0:00:07-0:00:22 So what were the families, what was family life like in Craigmont, Michigan, so forth, just a picture of what went on from your perspective.

IT: 0:00:32-0:00:59 Well, I think it was a old tradition European family with the authoritarian father, mother who was supposed to be submissive.

AF: 0:01:02-0:01:04 I like that "supposed to be." You want to comment on that?

IT: 0:01:05-0:02:00 Well, I was going to add, which my mother had a hard time doing sometimes.

On the other hand, sometimes it would be more so than I would think she should have been and sometimes she would burst out. Children were supposed to be polite and seen and not heard and do what the parents said and so on.

I kind of feel we lived very parallel lives, not close knit.

AF: 0:02:01-0:02:06 Did you have dinner together every night? Was there, and what was the conversation?

IT: 0:02:06-0:02:10 It was a dinner every night, but it wasn't comfortable.

AF: 0:02:12-0:15:44 It wasn't comfortable because in a way it was four people who were leading parallel lives but who, somehow, it was demanded by society that they have dinner together and we talked about whatever my father felt like talking about.

AF: He didn't tell what happened to you at school?

IT: No.

AF: And he didn't ask. So your father would report on the day or he would report on the news or

IT: Yeah or the news or something he heard or sometimes nothing

AF: Yeah, but it wasn't what you "what I did in school today," you didn't have your turn. So you sort of sat there and ate politely top the table now. Did you, did you ever do anything wrong? We were always yelling at our kids about how they shouldn't eat with their fingers and all that kind of thing. Went ahead and ate with their fingers.

IT: No

AF: A lot of free for all went on at our table [LAUGHS].

IT: Well at ours too, I mean at mine, with my kids. No It was really quite proper. It was quite proper. I had been trained to do what was expected and which I did and

AF: Kids did in those days anyway.

IT: Yeah And so there wasn't it had already been trained, it had already been ingrained and I just a little later there would be a continuous friction between my mother and I about food.

AF: About what you should eat?

IT: Yeah.

AF: At dinner.

IT: Well it would be that I would try not to eat it. And she would try to force it.

AF: But this was in front of your father.

IT: Well but it would be quiet I mean if it wasn't.

AF: So how involved was he, let's say in your life would you say?

IT: Very little.

AF: He was very little involved. When you were asked to play, "Ina play something for us, Ina" at the parties. Remember that when you were always asked to play the piano at parties? You actually don't remember?

Oh I was going to get the answer to my big question. Which was how did you feel about that? Didn't you want to say no or whatever, you don't remember?

IT: I'm sure I wanted to sit here.

AF: Yeah. And Bob Vaught always had to play. Do you remember that? Do you remember Bob Vaught? He always had to play the piano.

IT: But I thought you enjoyed it.

AF: Probably about as much as you. Richard Montague had to play the piano and he was an organist, you know, but he had to play.

First of all Bob had to play, then Richard had to play and then you had to play. And it was always the same. And I wonder. I mean some kids-

IT: It's funny I don't remember.

AF: Yeah, you don't. But obviously it never occurred to you to say no. In the context of what you tell me-

IT: Well if I played then I guess it didn't occur to me to say no because I'm sure I didn't expect to.

AF: Yeah, right. But you did you played the piano for a while, did you like playing the piano for yourself?

IT: I liked it and then there was conflicts. Yeah, there was a period of time when I liked it.

AF: So you enjoyed it. And Jan didn't have to play an instrument, did he play? I mean he didn't have to perform for us.

IT: Yeah, I think he stopped quite soon.

AF: In fact he wasn't present at a lot of these gatherings so he was already older and my feeling was more sullen, or absent studying or just not there. But four years would have been, so in 1950 you were already like eleven, twelve, thirteen years

IT: So he was fourteen, fifteen sixteen, so he was still in high school.

AF: Yeah he was in high school. Where did he go to school?

IT: Berkeley high.

AF: No, but I mean where did he go to university?

IT: Berkley?

AF: He went to university. Did he live at home all the time?

IT: When he was at the university? No.

AF: No. Where'd he live in the dorm?

IT: I think he had a fight with my father either the first year he was at the university or right after the first year, and moved out on a moment's notice and supported himself from then on.

AF: I see. And where did you live when you were I lived for one year?

IT: I lived at home and then I moved out too.

AF: You moved out to Did you have a fight too?

IT: Yes.

AF: With your father or your mother? And after those-

IT: Well it wasn't much of a fight. They simply said, my father said that he cannot accept the conditions that I go out and come back late at night and I just shrugged my shoulders and started looking for an apartment. So I wouldn't say it was a fight but he said that it was a condition that I cannot and I wasn't accepting the condition.

AF: Yeah. But then did you come home and see him? [Yeah] Did your relationship change after that or-?

IT: Well you know it wasn't close before and it wasn't close after.

AF: But it wasn't any different.

IT: I don't think so, yeah. I mean, I really don't know why he cared what time I came home.

AF: Propriety propriety I would think.

IT: Yeah, I mean I think that for a while he didn't realize what time I was coming home and then one time he realized and then I remember one time being, a couple times being woken up in the middle of the night where he was checking to see if I was

AF: In or not.

IT: Yeah and if I was asleep and I must say that for those times I think we all went very quietly.

AF: What years were those and then those?

IT: Well let's see '56 and so it was one year, one year that I was home.

AF: Right, so fifty six and then you were out in.

IT: And it was the same. He said that he would support me through college if I lived at home but if I want to live out

AF: You had to do it yourself?

IT: Yeah, so I supported myself.

AF: What did you do?

IT: I had a job in delivery. Oh at first I did all kinds of odd jobs, from cleaning house to being a cashier at a cafeteria. And then I got the library job which was one of the great jobs at that time for students.

AF: But were you mad at them? Your father.

IT: There was nothing to be mad about. I mean, as I said, we led kind of separate lives and I was glad to be out of the house.

AF: So you didn't want to be any closer to him anyway. Is that fair to say? You didn't wish that you were-

IT: Yeah yeah that's fair to say yeah.

AF: But how would you describe your relationship with your mother? Was it a close, would you call it close?

IT: No.

AF: Not close with her either? And what about with Jan?

You weren't really too close to any in your family [Nope] and you found other people to be close to. Okay. Can we, am I permitted to talk about Ehrenfreucht and all of that?

IT: Sure.

AF: Okay. So when did you meet him?

IT: He came, he came to Berkeley. He was with Mostowski and that first year when I think people from Poland came 

AF: When was that? 

IT: Which, I think was let's see, my first year at Cal was '56 and I think it was '58 or maybe '57 that's something like that.

AF: Yeah. Okay. They came together.

IT: Yeah, they came at the same time. And in fact I came together at the same flight.

AF: Yeah, I remember we went to the subplace with them together we went to the beach with them took them to the beach down [Arway Airport ??? 7:30] when they visited Stanford.

IT: No not them. 

AF: No but he eventually came. But I mean on that visit I think we went to the beach, and I remembered him climbing all over the rocks and wanting to go in that cold cold water at San Gregorio. And I think they probably did the tour stuff.

Okay, so then you met him then at your house at your parents house party when you met him? Okay. And how long was it before you and he got married?

IT: I don't know when we got married because we were living together before we got married and then we just went off and got married.

AF: And when were you living when did you start living together?

IT: Well that year he was in Berkeley and then he went back to Poland and then I came to Poland and so I went to Poland in nineteen sixty.

AF: But you already became lovers that first year? Is that right? The first year you came? Is that okay for me to say? I mean, I'm not sure I'm going to use this, but should there be a context 

IT: No, I don't mean I mean-

AF: I think everybody knows it who knows about it.

IT: But who cares whether we'll be here sooner or later?

AF: No, but I mean that's okay? There's no problem about my discussing this material should it be should it be something that comes in. I just want to be clear about that. Is that right?

IT: I guess I would maybe prefer that that was omitted. I mean, I don't see what possible interest that can have for anybody. Let it be a little bit later. He didn't have a divorce yet.

AF: Right, right.
 Well, I think that I think what's interesting is that the relationship between you and Ehrenfreucht is interesting in terms of it being a relationship with a logician who wasm in a sense, a descendant of your father in some sense.

And that's unavoidable for me to think that even you may not think so, and it would be almost unavoidable for a reason. So I mean, I may not even spell it out, but the fact that you became the lover of a student of a student of your father. Close to your father.

IT: Well, I mean, I went on to marry him so-

AF: I know I mean it's not the lover marriage episode. I mean, I think it's the fact that you did have, that you were very close to him et cetera. I mean, you know, I don't like super psychologizing or anything, but there's

IT: We all live in our in our own university region.

AF: Yeah, right. You know, there's clearly some connection there. Yeah. At any rate, you were by 1960 you went to Poland, and by that time you were a solid couple.

IT: No, we weren't living together, I think. We started living together a year after that.

AF: In Poland?

IT: Yeah.

AF:
But you went to Poland specifically to be with him.
Is that right?

IT: Well, I was getting my master's in sociology. Officially, I was getting my master's in sociology.

AF: Yeah, but you could do that in the United States too.

IT: Sure.

AF: So yeah, but people travel.

IT: Yeah.

AF: But the fact if he had not been there, would you have gone and he'd been in California, would you have gone to Poland to get your master's in sociology?

IT: It's not impossible.

AF: It's not impossible. Where did you go in Poland?

IT: Warsaw.

AF: To the University of Warsaw.

So he had been married and had a couple kids. He divorced and you married. And what year was that the actual marriage?

IT: Our actual marriage?

AF: 0:15:53-0:17:04 Yeah.

IT: I'm not sure. '65 maybe 

AF: '65 was the actual but you have been living together since 1960, or 1961?

IT: Early '62 maybe.

AF: Okay, somewhere in the early sixties. And that was so that was in Poland. So how long did you stay? You went to Poland in 1960 and-

IT:
I was there for two academic years.

AF: Stayed two years.

IT: Got my master's.

AF: How was it, the program of sociology here?

IT: Very political.

AF: And was that what you wanted?

IT: No.

AF: But besides being very political, you wanted the master's? [Yeah] And then what happened after those two years?

IT: 0:17:04-0:17:21 Well, then Andrzej came here and was I don't know he was a research assistant or something. 

AF: Pardon?

IT: He had something at the university.

AF: 0:17:21-0:20:18 Here at Berkeley? 

IT:
At Berkeley and so and then we were living together still not married. Then he went back to Poland and then after that he came to Stanford.

AF: Yeah. And when were you? So when he was at Stanford were you living were you living together?

IT: Right then we were married.

AF: You were married but you weren't were you at Stanford too? He was living here.

IT: We were living in Berkeley.

AF: Right. He was communicating right. So he had a job in Berkeley and then a job in Stanford but lived in Berkeley.

IT: Mhm.

AF: And when were the children born?

IT: Well let's see Ania was born in '68, Renia '70.

AF: Renia's R-E-N-Y-A?

IT: R-E-N-I-A.

AF: R-E-N-I--A. That's a girl.

IT: '70 and Michael '73.

AF: So let's see, and so they were all born in Berkeley?

IT: No, actually Ania was born in, Ania and Renia were born in Los Angeles.

AF: In Los Angeles because you were there then where Andrzej was at [USC] USC. So these two were born in USC and then you were back in Berkeley?

IT: In Colorado.

AF: In Colorado, that's right. Which is where he still lives. Right?

IT: Mhm . AF: Now, let's see, someone said that your father objected to your marrying him, Ehrenfreucht? Not true? He didn't?

IT: My mother didn't like it.

AF: So your mother did object it.

IT: Well, she didn't "object" because she didn't feel she had anything to say or she could say anything. [Yeah] But she didn't like it.

AF: She didn't like the idea you marrying. And why not?

IT: Well, because he had been married.

AF: Uh huh.

IT: I think, not only because of that, I think I don't think she liked him at the beginning.

AF: She didn't like him. And do you know why?

IT: At the beginning, afterwards she liked him.

AF: You mean when you were first going around with she didn't like him?

IT: Yeah. 

AF: But as far as you know, Tarski had no objection?

IT: No, no, he liked it.

AF: Yeah, that was would have been my impression, so I was surprised to hear, you hear fantastic kinds of gossip all over the place.

IT: Oh, about everything. 

[PHONE RINGS]

AF: 0:20:29-0:20:56 Well, I always thought Ehrenfreucht was an enormously appealing person, an attractive man.

IT: Well, I know, I think I remember when I told my father that I was planning to live with Andrzej, he [UNINTELLIGIBLE] "No, I think that's a good choice." In fact, I remember those were his words. 

AF: Yeah. That's a good choice. Very good! Okay.

Had you had lots of boyfriends before him? I mean, not that this is relevant.

IT: I don't know, I was going to say it depends what you mean "lots". [Yeah.] I certainly had boyfriends. 

AF: Yeah, yeah. Two thousand? Five, eight, ten?  Well, let's see.  How old were you?

IT: I was quite young when I started seeing him. 

AF: How old were you?

IT: I was twenty when I met him.  But that wasn't a commitment yet that first year and he was here in Poland. You know, so from twenty two I was basically...

AF: By that time you're a real woman, you know?

IT: Yeah, yeah. 

AF: But that must have been a big that's a big commitment to go to Poland. At that point, it would seem to me so that you must have really known what you wanted.

And then what? You and he were divorced when?

IT: 0:22:06-0:22:09 Well, we're not actually legally divorced.

AF: 0:22:09-0:22:44 You're not legally divorced. So well, separated, let's say.

IT: Yeah, well there was no one particular moment.  I mean, just kind of at first we... I asked him to move out. You know, at first he said "no" and then he said "okay"

AF: We're talking about Colorado? 

IT: Yeah and we were still friends and you know and then it just the distance started growing and there was never any formal divorce as of yet. 

AF: But he's he's living with somebody else?

IT: 0:22:44-0:22:45 Yeah.

AF: 0:22:45-0:32:30 And does he have children with this woman?

IT: No, no, no. 

AF: Well, how are your relations with him now?

IT: No they're just kind of at first we were friends, we would see each other.  He would come to the house and we would talk...

AF: In Colorado. [Mhm] You lived in Colorado, in other words, independently?

IT: Yeah. And then it just our paths simply started not crossing so often and until they stopped crossing. 

AF: Right. But are you angry with them now?

IT: Maybe now more than I was at the time. Partly maybe as an influence of my daughter who's a feminist and or, no one of my daughters was

AF: Renia?
 IT:  That kind of some of the women's issues, which I must say I wasn't aware of. And you know how automatically it was that I did various things and, you know, carrying the old tradition in a kind of automatic way and not thinking about it. And after it became kind of more clear to me what was happening I would say, then I kind of got angry. And that was recent. 

Right so it's kind of funny when we separated I wasn't angry.

AF: Why did you separate?

IT: Because I didn't feel that we wanted the same thing and I didn't feel like, I thought we were mutually selfdestructive. Mutually being bad for each other as opposed to being good for each other.

AF: This probably always won't be in them just because I'm always interested in... Does he keep in touch with the kids that-? [Yeah] Did any of the kids stay there in Colorado? 

IT: Well it was the year that my oldest daughter, this one here graduated, from high school. So she stayed there for one more year.

AF: To finish high school?

IT: No, no, she stayed after she finished high school. She had just finished high school when we moved here and she decided to stay there.

AF: Yeah, right.

IT: So she stayed for one year and then decided to come out-

AF: -after that. What made you decide to move back here?

IT: What she did? 

AF: No, you.

IT: You know a whole bunch of different things.

AF: Did you move back in with your mother?

IT: Yeah I thought she was, she needed me. I had somebody who I was seeing here.

AF: I see.

IT: I kind of felt that I had more options here than in Boulder.

AF: In Boulder.

IT: And I had a relationship 

AF: With a person.

IT: Yeah. And my second daughter Renia who was had one more year left in high school liked the idea. [Uh-huh?] And so it seemed it was, why not?

AF: Yeah, right.

IT: And I didn't feel committed to stay at the time.

AF: To Colorado.

IT: No, I didn't feel committed to staying in Colorado, but I didn't feel committed to stay here. I simply moved in in my mother's house was helping, her and I could go back anytime I wanted.

AF: Right.

IT: So it wasn't as if I felt I was making any...

AF: Big move?

IT: ...or moves which I couldn't redo if I wanted to.

AF: Right. Yeah. How do you end up feeling about your mother in the end? Also getting a bit ahead but you know now that

IT: I feel a pity and I feel a pity I should clarify that for what a pity that I didn't talk I certainly feel a pity that I didn't talk when she could still talk.

I mean I feel. I feel it's a pity that she felt, I feel, made some mistakes with me which really put a barrier which neither of us was able to break. And therefore I didn't really appreciate her and I don't think she appreciated me.

And I think it's a pity because I think it was just a profound lack of communication.

AF: It is a pity.  But yeah, it just happens. It happens so much and it still it is a pity. It's a pity and it's sad.

IT: Well it's pity and it's sad and it's, I mean it's a pity for everybody. It's something where nobody gains. Nobody gains, everybody loses.

AF: What do you know about all the breakup between your mother and father?  Were you privy to that? Do you know the details of it? Do you have any special insights about it or...? I mean I'll probably ask other people and there was of course lots of gossip about that.

IT: I'm sure there were lots of gossip.

AF: I mean your father was somebody everybody talked about all the time that a figure like that just even if they don't do what sensational or quote "scandalous" things everybody talks about them. Anyway so I really would like to hear from you what you know and your perspective on it because I'm going to be hearing it from other people.

IT: Well I think my parents were very ill suited to each other. [Uh-huh?] I think they should have broken up a long time before. I don't think there was any one particular thing just. Like maybe there was but I mean even if somebody told me "well yes there was it was this, this and this and this", I don't think so. I don't believe so.

AF: That that was the reason, you mean?

IT: Well yeah because after my mother decided she wanted to move out, my father didn't want her to.

AF: Did she move out?  

IT: Yeah

AF: I thought he moved out.

IT: No.

AF: She moved out of the Michigan avenue house?

IT: And he didn't want her to.

AF: Yeah.

IT: And she moved out and she got a house in Berkeley on Regent Street and... In fact that year afterwards was probably one of the best relationships maybe they had in the last ten or twenty years.

He would come for lunch and they would go places together, and she would go up to Michigan Avenue and... You know he was kind of courting her.

AF: That's exactly the word that we used that Szerba... a couple people lived in the house with your mother? She had I take it, she took in, she had rumors. 

IT: Yeah

AF: A whole suit came.

IT: She bought this house with a [much too big full in ??? 31:02] person and, I was living there for several months, but basically she was alone she took the-

[NOTE: I couldn't verify the identity of any of the Poles mentioned here, so I rendered the closest phonetic equivalent to their names as I could.]

AF: She had Poles who came to be here for a year and both Szczerba and Pawlok were-

IT: Pawlok? Dzisł?

AF: Yeah, were there, and both of the...

IT: Have you spoken to Łosz?

AF: Huh?

IT: Łosz?

AF: Well Łosz, I haven't spoken to, I wrote him a letter, but they were there and they both described Alfred's visits to her as... They both described being present when he was "courting" her and how nice that was.

But that was then after... They actually divorced right?

IT: No, no.

AF: I thought they actually divorced and he actually married somebody else.

IT: He never-

AF: No. That's, you're sure of that? You're absolutely sure that no divorce?

IT: There was no divorce 

AF: No divorce. Okay, but there was this Dorothy woman? Did you know her at all? [Mhm] And she was a secretary of this of the 1971 conference?

IT: She was the secretary of something. I thought she was simply in the department. 

AF: My recollection is that she was the woman who organized, this was around 1970, when she was the woman who organized this big '69, organized the big symposium for your father that year.

IT: And that I don't think so because

AF: Tell me what you think.

IT: 0:32:30-0:32:55 Well, 1960 I went to Poland and that's when my mother, my mother moved out a year before my last year of college here. So that must have been '59.

AF: 0:32:56-0:47:01 Your mother moved out in 1959. You sure? [Mhm.] And how long were they apart then?

IT: She was, when I met Andrzej, they were still together. Then I moved out and I was too busy with my own things and I don't really know what was going on there but my guess is not that much different than what happened before.

Then I went to Poland and then she moved out before I went to Poland because when I left for Poland in 1960 I was on her house on Regent Street. I left from that house.

AF: So she was already, so she had moved out by certainly by 1960 she had moved out from there. And so when did they get together again?

IT: Okay, so then I was two years in Poland. She was in Regent Street, it was the year after... Back here she was still in Regent Street...back in...

Okay I think, I think, so one, two, three, four. I think she was there certainly for four years, and it might have been five or six, but certainly four.

AF: Okay four or five... By the time your children were born her grandchildren 

IT: They were already together 

AF: So you know that by that time, certainly by 1968, they were back together in Michigan. Well that's a good way to date it and maybe and most likely before.

IT: Well before because let's see I had a pregnancy which I lost a year before that and they were in Los Angeles and they were together in Los Angeles.

She came up when this happened. And so '68, '66. So it was around '65, '66.

AF: Apart for about five years? [Yeah] So she came up when you lost your baby? So that indicates a certain closeness, doesn't it? No?

IT: No... I mean sure you know it depends what you call my closeness. I mean she terribly wanted to have a grandchild. And she, she felt terrible about it. You know I mean, like, when I was in Colorado she always phoned me once a week, she came to visit once a year. 

AF: But you just didn't feel close.

IT: But they were never happy visits. She would come once a year and almost always she would leave either in a fight or angry or early or... But it never stopped her from coming the year after. And the way I was brought up there was no way that I would say or could say "no don't come."

AF: She would say "I'm coming." 

IT: Yeah she wouldn't ask me, she would tell me I mean that's the way things were.

AF: So you used to dread her visits.

IT: Yeah.

AF: And when the grandchildren were born, then what? Did anything change?

IT: No.

AF: Same way?

And what about Alfred? Did he care for his grandchildren?

IT: Well I think he was he didn't feel he could, you know, he never related to children.

AF: Related to children?

AF: It was something cute and nice to look at or a funny story to repeat...or, yeah.

AF: So not exactly a happy family life. [Nope] And you don't think your mother was happy either?

IT: No.

AF: What would she have said do you think? Would she... If she were alive and I were asking her?

IT: She wouldn't discuss it with you.

AF: She wouldn't talk about it. I asked Maria Mostovska about what she knew about them. Oh, she thought they, Alfred and Maria, were very much in love.

IT: I wonder how should she say that.

AF: Or maybe it was Raszova also. And well some people don't like to say anything that's unseemly. Tarski's such a great man for these people

IT: You know, perhaps that's it. The other thing is is that I think that there was a certain amount of mutual affection during the whole thing. When I said that I thought they were very ill suited it doesn't mean that the only feelings they felt for each other were negative. They were simply very ill suited. They would both have been happier with somebody else.

There was a certain understanding which they simply did not have for each other, whereas somebody else could have been much better fitted into each other's lives I feel.

That's what I mean by ill suited. It doesn't mean that they didn't... Like my father I know what my father had said and probably Steve will repeat this to you also, because he told, Steve said that he told it to him too. But he told it to me too, I mean it's that he's loved other women in his life but he never loved anyone more.

He had a great deal of respect for my mother. He could tell that, he knew that there were some things that she was capable of and had done which he was not capable of and would not have been able to do if he was in that situation. And this was very clear to him, and which neither did he ever deny it.

I mean he would say it, he would say it.

AF: That she was very great 

IT: And... yeah you know so he had respected that-

AF: He admired her.

IT: -he respected that.

AF: Somewhere I got the idea that he had married above his social and economic station, but that's not true. She was they were essentially of the same class in both the two families.

IT: Oh, I think his family was much richer.

AF: His family was richer? Oh.

IT: I think so. Well I don't know maybe they weren't that rich but they were certainly comfortable and I think his father was in the in the... Well he was in business and it was, I think it was lumber, wood. And his mother was... Well again I remember being told that she never did anything around the house.

AF: That his mother didn't work.

IT: So she didn't- Yeah, but I mean she didn't work outside of the house but neither did she-

AF: Work in the house 

IT: -did she have to cook.

I mean there was somebody else, she didn't know how to cook. Maybe not a bunch but somebody else did the cooking and cleaning.

AF: I see so, well it's quite the other way around then. Somehow I had the picture that she had come from a family of some status and that he was the "brilliant student" but beneath her socially and economically so that's not your understanding. I don't know where I got that.

IT: That's not my understanding. Well my mother's family was from what I know very upright and respected and good people. You know, good. The kind that poor people would come and knock on the door for soup and would always get it.

AF: Right, yeah.

IT: But they did not have nothing, they did not have a castle or a mansion or... I mean, my mother's mother worked!

AF: But your father's mother didn't. When did you begin-?

IT: So I think this kind of respect which they had for each other, I think lasted-

AF: Always

IT: -I think always lasted.

AF: Did you know that your father had lots of lovers?

IT: Yeah.

AF: You knew that, even as a young girl you knew that?

IT: Yeah.

AF: Starting like from when? From when you were ten? Or when you were twelve?

IT: Well yeah from [Wanda Schmelov ??? 43:57]

AF: Yeah you knew that [Wanda Schmelov] was his lover? And how did you know that?

IT: I don't know.

AF: You just knew it?

IT: I think how I knew it was that my mother, who would try to keep a very... would try to keep an even thing in the house and do what was correct, would blow up. And so there would be great scenes periodically. 

AF: I see 

IT: And then everybody heard everything 

AF: I see.  So you heard that?

IT: Yeah.

AF: So that was a great love affair between your father and Wanda, I take it.

IT: I don't think so.

AF: You don't think so?

IT: No I don't think so

AF: You think it was-

IT: Probably most people disagree, but I don't think so. I think it was a long lasting deep friendship.

AF: Mhm, okay.

IT: I think that they had... I mean my father himself said "to have her for a lover it's one thing to marry her, never."

AF: Well why was that? He said that to who, to your mother or to the world at large?

AF: To the world at large. [Yeah] And the thing is that my father had this opinion or this belief or this... that you don't compromise and that you don't, so that when he felt like doing this why should he not do it?

But it's not that it was all-consuming for him.

AF: Yeah. But why not. I mean that's sort of an odd thing to say, "to marry her, never" because you could say that about anybody. You know in other words

IT: No because, I mean, he married my mother.

AF: Yeah, right. But your mother came after. He was already married to your mother. But in other words, if Wanda had come along and your mother hadn't been in the picture, in effect he's saying he wouldn't have married her.

He wouldn't have married Wanda even if he hadn't been married to your mother. Is that the implication?

IT: I think that's the implication.

AF: Yeah right. But he didn't say why? And why not?

IT: Well I mean I never discussed that with him.

AF: Yeah, right. Yeah. I'm just wondering myself now.

There are rumors that Wanda's child might have been his child. Have you ever heard, you've never heard that rumor?

IT: I've never heard that rumor.

AF: You've heard that her child is somebody else's child?

IT: Well somebody else's, which I think is very well documented.

AF: Whose is that child?

IT: Borsuk.

AF: Borsuk's child.

IT: And Borsuk after his has-

[RECORDING CUTS]



--- END TRANSCRIPTION ---