AF: 0:00:00-0:00:44
I know, that's why I'm going to start, because you're going to fold.
If somebody didn't know Tarski at all, and they asked you who he was, and this is somebody who not only personally doesn't know him, but doesn't know anything about him, what would you say?

I don't know what to say.
Who is this guy Tarski?
Someone says to you when you talk about Tarski, who you know and studied with for so long.

DS:
25 additional words of this.

AF:
No, as many words as you want.
The more, the better.
But you can describe him physically or personally.
Any way you want to.
Start from any point,
that you think that person who doesn't know who him [unintelligible]. STOPPEDHERE

DS:
I don't know who I'm talking to, so if it's an academic answer, I mean he was certainly one of the top logicians of the mid-century.


AF:
Top logicians of the mid-century.

DS:
Yeah.

AF:
Okay.

DS:
From 1930 to 1960.
But, okay, I, and that's it.
a subject, which is the most important logician of that period.
So you say after Gödel?
Yeah.
Because some people make it equal.
I just want to hear.
.
.
Well, but Gödel was a strange monk, right?
So, I mean, Paxsky was extremely influential on many fronts.
And certainly his teaching was equally important for the development of the logic of the subject.
And physically, this person wants to know what this guy looked like.
Well, there was always the cigarette.
We always watched him to see whether he would smoke the chalk or the cigarette.
Ne'emoth and his statements.
When you say he wasn't too tall, did you think of him as quite short?
I don't think he was.
You didn't think of him as quite short?


SPEAKER_00: 0:03:59-0:04:01
Very, very short, but he wasn't.


SPEAKER_01: 0:04:01-0:04:04
You didn't think of him as a really short man?


default: 0:04:04-0:04:05
No.
No.


SPEAKER_01: 0:04:05-0:05:31
No.
That's interesting, because you're quite tall yourself.
I'm six foot six.
Yeah, and I think of him as a short man, and I don't look from that.
So to you, it would seem to me that you would have thought of him as a short man, but you don't.
You think of him as not very tall.
I wasn't a midget.
No, no.
He was.
Oh.
I mean, people were shorter.
Sure.
Yeah.
Right.
But a lot of people describe him as a little man, and you didn't seem that way.
Maybe it's because he was always so dynamic, always.
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh.
Going somewhere, doing something.
He looked more for the aura than the form.
He was just passionate about any number of things, whether it was Mexican art and Mayan antiquities or whether it was poetry or what.
He was just very passionate about all the things that he was interested in.
So you didn't pay much terms of his vibrations in some

SPEAKER_00: 0:05:31-0:05:33
way.
Yes.


SPEAKER_01: 0:05:33-0:08:24
Yeah, but not to quibble, but there are people who did that and still saw him physically as short.
I mean, that's not important at all.
Well, there were certainly a lot of people who disliked him intensely because he pressed his own case and his own subject so strongly.
For example, I was terribly fond of the Lehmers, and they absolutely hated Tarski as early as I can make out.
Did they?
The Lehmer's.
The Lehmer's.
That's fascinating.
I went to interview Emma Lehmer.
Yes.
And she said, she didn't say that, she just said we didn't have much to do with him socially.
She never said anything about disliking.
That's wonderful of her, isn't it?
She just said we weren't close.
Well, I think it was Tarski pushed so much in the department.
I mean, you know, Dick Lamer never promoted himself.
In fact, he was something of a loner in his smaller circle.
I think Tarski was quite overbearing many times, in the way that he insisted on this.
It's just that you're talking rather low, so I'm going to put it closer to you.
Of course, the Robinsons were very fond of him.
They're probably the Lehmers' closest friends.
They were very close to Tarkovsky.
Robinsons still watches out for Emma Lehmer all the time.
It's just kind of touching, very touching.
He's there to see her.
Different people, well of course different people say different things, various people say that Julia was very cool about Tarski personally.
I think in fact it was Emma who said this, that they had no relationship really except as student, teacher and… Well of course there was a long history of girlfriends.
I mean I don't know if we could even count the romantic interests.
Yeah, well we're going to count them if we can.
I'm sure at the time it wasn't necessarily very well received.
Yeah, right, yeah.
I guess when you came as a graduate student there was Von der Schmeler.
Now did you know what was going on with Tarski and Von der Schmeler?
No, because that was after my time.
She was already gone.
She was already gone.
I mean, I know.
.
.
That was before your time.
Yeah, right.
I mean, yeah.
I came after that.
Period, that was about 1947 or so when she was in Brooklyn.
Well, 48, no, because she came several times, but it all didn't start until 48.


SPEAKER_00: 0:08:24-0:08:28
I started in 48.
She came again in 1950 or 1951.


SPEAKER_01: 0:08:28-0:08:35
Again, that's obvious.
I mean, I started in Berkeley in 1950.
Right.


SPEAKER_00: 0:08:35-0:08:36
As an undergraduate.


SPEAKER_01: 0:08:36-0:09:06
She appeared at some point when you were there, didn't she?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right.
Anyway, Saul told me something tonight that he had never said before.
When I asked him, it's always nice to hear that, I asked him, you know, how come he didn't know when everybody else seems to have known about Manga?
And he said, well, of course, you know, he never, he's always the lesson, I'm a truthful man.
Also he said, also he said that she felt he was coming on to him.


SPEAKER_00: 0:09:06-0:09:09
He felt she was coming on to him.


SPEAKER_01: 0:09:09-0:09:15
Saul felt that Fonda was coming on to him.
Was chasing after Tarski somehow.
No, it was coming on to me.


SPEAKER_00: 0:09:15-0:09:16
After you.


SPEAKER_01: 0:09:16-0:11:13
Yeah, she was coming on to him.
Did you ever have that feeling?
You never had that much to do with her?
She was a very complicated person.
We visited her in Warsaw and we met her daughter and such things.
I never heard what happened to her husband, who he was or what happened to him.
But she seemed like a person who was terribly full of regrets.
Yes.
And also.
.
.
In Warsaw, when you saw her.
Yeah.
And also, also very nostalgic for her fading beauty.
Yeah.
But you never felt that she was coming on to you when you were a young man.
That's.
.
.
Well, it was the wrong period.
Yes, I was also frightened of her.
Did you feel frightened of her in any way?
No, she was also, you know.
A very sexy older woman in this kind of story.
But, I mean, she was, you know, she spoke her mind.
It was very, I mean, she was a strong personality.
Yeah, but did she scare you?
Didn't scare me.
No, I always liked her very much.
Yeah.
Well, I think you did not like her.
No.
Those two things aren't mutually exclusive.
It scared me by the word.
Made you uneasy is what you said.


SPEAKER_00: 0:11:13-0:11:14
Uncomfortable.


SPEAKER_01: 0:11:14-0:11:22
Yeah.
Well, they did a lot of work in close proximity because Tarski wanted things in

SPEAKER_00: 0:11:22-0:11:41
the form that he wanted them in?
Well, I should just say, she had done her thesis on decision procedure for rebuilding groups and he wanted to cast all into the form of arithmetical classes.
Oh, I remember that.
Ah! And I was supposed to do that.
Oh! Yes.


SPEAKER_01: 0:11:41-0:11:48
So they sat together.
In this little room.
Oh dear.
Casting things.


SPEAKER_00: 0:11:48-0:11:53
It didn't take me long for me to come to the conclusion that this was a terrible mistake.


SPEAKER_01: 0:11:53-0:12:49
Socially or mathematically?
No, the mathematical.
Yes.
Okay, Dana, you're getting a whole one of these.
And so, which is the biggest?
Isn't this the biggest one?
I'll give you the small one.
Well, that's why I'm going to give you the small one.
And then Saul and I are dividing one in half.
And if we feel we've been deprived, then we're going to nibble some off your plate.
But you get the picture?
Well, if you want me to donate a little bit.
No.
I mean, usually I can barely eat a half of one of these.
You don't have to eat all of yours.
It looks lovely.
So, who was there before Vonda?
As a romantic interest?
I don't know.
There are stories about actresses in Poland that some people like to make up.
But, no, I mean he always had an eye for women.
about actresses in a pole in the film, people like to make up.
I mean, he always had an eye for women.


SPEAKER_00: 0:12:49-0:12:52
We don't know about Anne Morrill, for example.


SPEAKER_01: 0:12:52-0:13:06
She wasn't before.
She wasn't before Uwanda.
I mean, he was awfully fond of Anne Morrill.
Sarah Hallam intimated that there was something going on between Anne Morrill and him, and she had some evidence about this that I won't go into.


SPEAKER_00: 0:13:06-0:13:10
But she wasn't pre-Wanda, so.
.
.


SPEAKER_01: 0:13:10-0:16:09
The relationship with Wanda started in Poland, there's no question about that.
And Wanda, when she came, lived in the house, and there was all kinds of hell that I heard from Dina about what went on in terms of her in the house.
But, let's see, so there might have been somebody in Poland before, before Wanda, but Wanda certainly was Tarski's student in Poland, and so I doubt that there was anyone in the United States.
There was no one in the United States who.
.
.
1945 the war ended, right?
Yeah.
Maria came in 1946.
Maria and her children came through some sort of influence from the church.
How did they get out?
Through Sweden.
Wedberg in Sweden.
Big stories about that.
Oh, I met him.
He was very, very influential, very wealthy.
And there were various influences, but one of them was Wedberg who received, got them to Sweden, where they stayed for about a month in Stockholm, and then got on a freighter and went to Philadelphia.
Oh, I see.
I thought it was through the church.
No, not through the church.
And there was also influence somehow from Marshall Stone's father, who was a Supreme Court Justice.
And there was a former girlfriend of Tarski's whose husband was in the Minister of Defense in Poland.
So there was a triumvirate who managed.
and they were practically the first people to get out, practically the first refugees of any kind to get to the United States.
I mean, they were by 1946, they were in Berkeley.
When did the communist regime take over?
Right away, I think.
Because Kalitsky got out by having forged a passport just before the government changed.
And that was when?
Must have been 1946-ish, right?
It didn't take very long for them.
I've heard from some people that it was as much Maria's escaping from the communists as her just getting out of Poland immediately after the war.
That was impressive.
Is it true she had lived in the country during the war?
She was all over the place.
She was mostly in Poland and mostly in Warsaw until the uprising and then went to Krakow.
Because she's non-Jewish, yes?
She's Catholic.
There's a lot of stories about Tarski's conversion, about how various people felt about it, different people and how they talk about it.
When did he change his name?
I don't have the exact date on it, but it was not much after 1930.
It was already in effect by 1930.
Sammy Eilenberg was in.
.
.
Probably earlier, I think.
Early.


SPEAKER_00: 0:16:09-0:16:10
Yeah, wait, I said.
.
.


SPEAKER_01: 0:16:10-0:19:14
Yeah.
Sammy Eilenberg.
.
.
His first paper is entitled.
.
.
Yeah.
Right.
Sammy Eilenberg knew him in Poland.
And he started publishing in his mid-20s or early-20s.
Sammy Eilenberg really doesn't like him.
No, Sammy never liked him.
No, and he's got lots of nasty stories about him and so forth.
And I've had fun talking to Sammy.
But what he doesn't like about him was that he converted and was so pious about it.
And there.
.
.
Have you ever heard of somebody named Knoster?
Okay, well, Knoster also converted and nobody was.
.
.
I met him.
Nobody was really mad about that.
When did you meet Knoster?
I met him in Wroclaw.
So nobody was angry with Knoster or nobody ridiculed Knoster, according to Sammy.
But everybody made fun of Alfred because he was so righteous about what he had done.
I mean, he didn't just say, well, this is a queer movement, and so forth and so on.
But also he married a Catholic woman.
But of course it was certainly motivated on some level because, I mean, Jews weren't appointed to be professors of the United States.
Right, right.
Still, Eilenberg dislikes him for it.
And not for doing it, but for the way he did it, for his style about it.
But other people don't.
I mean, if you talk to Poles, they think it's perfectly fine.
Everybody was doing it.
All of us are part Jewish, blah, blah, blah, blah.
You can't really help.
Yeah.
Right.
I mean, from the middle of the century.
If you talk to Poles, you get one story.
part Jewish, blah, blah, blah, blah.
Look in Germany, how?
Yeah.
I mean, from the middle of the century.
If you talk to Poles, you get one story.
If you talk to a Jew like Eilenberg, whose family was annihilated in the Holocaust, you get another story.
But Tarski's family was also annihilated in the Holocaust.
But there are some not so nice stories about Tarski from, even from some Poles.
And then there are stories about Tarski, which are, you know, our father, our godfather, our grandfather, all my lineage dates from Tarski.
So, I mean, that's what makes, that's what makes things interesting.
Of course, I mean, his being out of Poland when the war started was really accidental.
Accidental.
Well, it wasn't.
It was accidental that he didn't know this was coming.
What?
I said it was accidental that he didn't know that the… It would go so fast.
Yeah, right.
But he had come to look for a job here.
He hadn't… I at first thought he had just come for this Unity of Science conference, but in fact he had come to look for a job here because he wasn't getting any.
Did he have an invitation to Harvard?
No, he had an invitation to this meeting at the Unity of Science conference.
Oh, wow.
And then he got – jobs were just patched together for him until – Was New York the first one?
Well, he went and gave lectures in New York.
He talked in Nagel's class, and Leon Henken happened to be a student in that class.


SPEAKER_00: 0:19:14-0:19:14
Columbia.


SPEAKER_01: 0:19:14-0:20:24
Yeah.
Henken describes how Nagel said this really great logician was coming from Poland to talk to them in their logic class.
And Leon remembers that he deliberately wanted to ask a question, not so much because he wanted to know the answer of the question, but he wanted to have a one-on-one contact with this man, and that he asked the question after the lecture.
He asked the question and he got an answer.
Leon has forgotten a lot of things, but he remembers that episode.
So here you are in Berkeley, and you started out on your course of study with Tarski, and on your course of study with Tarski, and you leave.
So you've got to tell why.
I'm still licking my fingers.
Yes.
What sent you away?
Wait.
Something a little less good.
No, that's meant for that.
That's what it's for.
Okay.


default: 0:20:23-0:20:29
No, that's meant to be that.
That's what it's for.


SPEAKER_01: 0:20:34-0:21:06
Why did you leave?
And when did you leave?
At what stage?
I realize this all fits in with my great revelation of when I came to Berkeley as a freshman in 1950.
I met all these interesting professors who like to reminisce about the 20s.
I thought, oh, they're so old.
That's great.
Here you are.
Perfect.
It's like the other revelation I had when I realized that all my students were born after the war.
Yeah, okay.


SPEAKER_00: 0:21:06-0:21:14
After the war, in the 60s.


SPEAKER_01: 0:21:14-0:27:22
What war?
What war, yeah.
Right now, no.
But anyway, what.
.
.
Well, let's see.
So first, you know, here you.
.
.
but you were engaged.
I mean, I know the story about how you and Kaliski found each other.
Because he was teaching a course.
He had just come there under Tarski's wing and was teaching a sophomore course.
That's how I met him.
And I had been working in the library and found the Journal of Symbolic Logic.
The only paper I could understand was one by Kaliski.
Then I realized he was the one who was teaching the course.
What were you studying?
The course was a course that's not anymore, called Theory of Equations.
No, but what were you studying as a sophomore until that point?
Math.
You were studying math, but not logic.
Let's see.
I took Ma Hanka's course.
I don't remember.
You came to the math.
.
.
I certainly took Mates' courses in philosophy.
Philosophy.
That was probably later.
But you were a math student and not thinking to do logic.
No.
Then you came across this thing, the Journal of Symbolic Logic, and you looked, well, this looks interesting.
You looked in, found a paper you could understand.
So he took this guy's course, who then led you to Tarski.
No.
I jumped to Tarski.
You jumped to Tarski.
I marched at the consternation of Kalitski.
Yeah, but how did you even know about Tarski?
Well, because.
.
.
In the course, you must.
.
.
He came to work with Tarski.
Yeah, okay.
Iki.
Tarski got him a temporary job.
So it led you in that sense, that it was through Kalitski that you became aware of Tarski.
But then I heard about the seminars that were going on.
So one day I made an appearance at the seminar.
I think Kulitsky was speaking actually.
He was very upset because I hadn't asked his permission to come to the seminar.
I was sort of on a higher plunge.
What a brash young man you were.
I'm sure Saul was there, and Bob was there.
Yeah?
But they were graduate students and here you were a sophomore?
I'll be a junior.
Okay.
And then the other main influence was Montague, because he was, I guess he was already a graduate student.
Right.
He was very close to Benson Mates.
So we took courses together.
You and Richard?
In fact, we took Patrick Supie's first course.
In Berkeley?
Yes, because had someone died?
I can't remember.
Supi came here.
This was Supi's first job here, wasn't it?
He was hired to give a course in philosophy of science because there was some gap at Berkeley.
So you and Richard went to Monague's, went to Supi's course.
And so I'm sure it was through Soupy's that I met McKenzie, which of course then led to lots of Tarski stories.
They met in New York, I guess.
McKenzie and Tarski.
McKenzie and Tarski.
McKenzie and Tarski.
Mm-hmm.
What kind of stories did he tell you?
Well, McKenzie, I wish I could remember them all.
McKenzie was always telling stories, so that.
.
.
Right.
The only one I remember really well was the one on Sanitary and Epidemiology.
Oh, well, we know that one.
Okay.
Right.
But that was with McKinsey.
Yeah.
Because he claimed he was in the car.
Okay.
Well, Tarski loved McKinsey, according to Steve Givant, in his article on Tarski.
He claimed that McKinsey was the only person that he was really close to, in the sense of the only person that he could really call, deeply call a friend.
It was kind of interesting.
I mean, Gervant uses this as an illustration of his non-prejudice against gays and so forth.
But also that he was a lonely man, rather, in spite of his gregariousness.
And when he went to count real friends, one of the few people he counted was McKenzie.
Oh, McKenzie's death upset me enormously.
I mean, I had in fact really never known anyone who died at that age.
I mean, when I was 20, 21.
And so, I mean, Supis was terribly upset too, because they were very close friends.
And the whole question of, you know, sleeping pills and alcohol and all that in his lifestyle.
Right.
I mean, you could never really decide, was it a willful act or was it.
.
.
Right.
Was it letting something happen?
It did happen, yeah.
But anyway, so you were there for several years.
You already started graduate school?
You started as a graduate student.
One-year graduate school.
One-year graduate student with Tarski, as Tarski was already designated as your advisor in your mind?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
And then you upped and left.


SPEAKER_00: 0:27:22-0:27:27
Yes.
Had you already done some work with Charles P.
Henry?


SPEAKER_01: 0:27:27-0:28:29
Oh, sure.
Boolean algebras and.
.
.
Had you written papers already?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Prime Ideal Field.
Mm-hmm.
I can't remember.
Okay.
So you go.
Why?
Because Woodger had made this translation of Tarski's papers.
And dear old Woodger was one of those amazing English eccentrics, and had worked incredibly hard to translate all these things, but not being an athletician and only an amateur logician, he bungled a whole lot of it.
So Richard Montague and I had to do the proofreading of these articles.


SPEAKER_00: 0:28:29-0:28:34
Where was Woodger?
Was he at Berkeley?


SPEAKER_01: 0:28:34-0:29:17
Yeah.
That was before he finished his PhD.
Woodger?
No, Woodger was in England.
Yeah, okay.
Parsky had spent some time in England.
Woodger was working on the foundations of biology in a sort of Russell Whitehead style of things and wrote a book that he attributed a lot of the inspiration to Tarski from that time that he was there.
When was Tarski in England?
Well, I think, I mean he went to, he made several tours.


SPEAKER_00: 0:29:17-0:29:18
Chipster Beatty.


SPEAKER_01: 0:29:18-0:29:32
He certainly was in Vienna, that's where Quine first met him.
Yeah, but that's, yeah.
So this is pre-39?
I think so.
Huh?
I don't think so.
I think he was in Vienna, but I don't think he went to England.


SPEAKER_00: 0:29:32-0:29:35
No, maybe pre-39.


SPEAKER_01: 0:29:35-0:29:45
Okay.
I didn't even, so I'll have to check on that.
Woodger probably says in his book, his book on whatever it's called, Foundations of Biology.


SPEAKER_00: 0:29:45-0:29:46
Okay.


SPEAKER_01: 0:29:48-0:30:02
So, I mean there were about 20 or 25 articles in that very heavy book.
So we had done about half of them.


SPEAKER_00: 0:30:02-0:30:04
What year was that?


SPEAKER_01: 0:30:04-0:32:09
What year was that?
So that was 1954?
You're saying what?
1954?
Probably the summer of 1954.
So you and Richard are working on this?
And then Richard finished.
His degree.
I mean, I guess he was already hired at UCLA before.
Probably had totally submitted the thing.
But he went down there.
And so I was supposed to finish up the proofreading.
And I procrastinated.
Tarski got very angry at me because he would phone the place where I was living and people would say, no, he's not here now.
I wanted to not take a phone call from Tarski.
So he was very angry at me for falling down on the job.
In fact, he was so angry at me that it was really impossible to talk with him.
So Steenrod was here for the year, that was 1954-55.
And Harley Flanders said, well, why don't you go someplace else for graduate school?
You asked him what you should do?
Yes.
You went to Steenrod, You went to Flanders?
Flanders, yes.
I took courses from him.
What did it have to do with Sinrad being there?
Because he's from Princeton.
I got it.
So I went to talk to him and all that.
He helped me apply and I guess wrote a letter of recommendation.
So that's how I got to Princeton.
So in effect, you felt Tarski was kicking you out rather than you were leaving because you were disgusted?
No, I mean, I felt very guilty about falling down on the job.
But Tarski was extremely angry for a long time.
And so the atmosphere was very difficult.
Was poison.


SPEAKER_00: 0:32:11-0:32:14
Did you think his response was excessive?


SPEAKER_01: 0:32:15-0:37:50
Well, he always had his slaves.
We always used to say, Right.
You know, we always used to say, the prosecutor gets up at three o'clock in the morning and asks you to come over to Link's stamps.
That was the sort of thing.
That's crazy.
Sort of thing.
Well, at the time, did you feel righteous about leaving, or did you feel, Jesus, I hope I can find a way to get out of here.
Well, I felt guilty about doing a bad job, and I didn't see any way to resolve the question of anger with him, and so I left.
That's great.
That's interesting.
I mean, I never really.
.
.
just in my imagination, I sort of imagined that you had some reason, independent of something like this that would have made you decide that somehow you wanted to get away from this guy.
But it wasn't that at all.
No, it was that he was so angry with you.
Yeah.
And then at the – I mean, I always kept in close contact with Supis, and then I guess it was probably the next summer at the summer AMS conference that was in Ann Arbor.
So Roger Linden, those people there, so I had a rapprochement with Tarski.
That was a year later?
A year later.
Uh-huh.
Well, no doubt he regretted that you left.
I mean, it's clear later that he did.
But did you feel immediately, did you have the sense a year later that he regretted it, or just that you could be friends again?
I think Tarski felt that, I mean, there seems to me there are other situations that people should make up their own minds and though maybe he regretted things, if that's what they decided to do, then.
.
.
That was okay.
.
.
.
then.
.
.
Well, I remember Tarski saying at one meeting about his students and who his students were and how great his students were, and that he hoped he could call you his student.
So there were great feelings of like, boy, what a mistake I made to send this guy away.
Not to send him away, Boy, what a mistake I made to send this guy away.
Not to send him away, because I didn't even think that, but somehow he had lost you.
Yes, but of course he was the.
.
.
And I always assumed that that the problem came from him.
Well, from your end, did you ever regret having gone?
I didn't regret having gone.
I've gone to so many places.
No, I mean, but did you ever regret having left Tarski in that time?
Did you ever think?
Actually not, because going to another place, you know, when I was 21 I had never been any farther east than Reno, Nevada.
Right.
And look where you've gone.
It was.
Well, it was an exciting place.
Did it give you a sense of power?
Did you have any sense of your own capacities at that point?
No.
If you want to talk about regrets, I have a lot of regrets for being so lazy and not finding out more things more people like.
I always regretted not taking Raphael Robinson's Complex Variable course.
I wish I had taken Steve Rahn's Topology course and other things like that.
But not having moved away.
So I regret that I didn't take advantage of all the interesting people that I had the opportunity to meet.
Right.
So your assessment of your decision now, at that point you made a certain decision, sort of forced in, you were kind of forced into it.
Yeah, well, I was running away.
You were running away.
Running away from the angry father.
Right, right.
But at the point, that, so that's how you saw it then.
And is that still how you, it hasn't changed, Your perspective on it hasn't changed from how it was then or how it was now?


default: 0:37:50-0:37:53
No.
Yeah.
That's interesting.


SPEAKER_00: 0:37:53-0:37:58
Did you have any active work with Church?


SPEAKER_01: 0:37:58-0:39:36
Yeah.
I worked a bit on.
.
.
Help yourself to some.
I worked a bit on recursive arithmetic.
He was writing papers on recursive arithmetic there.
I mean, more interesting were the students who were in Princeton, like Michael Rabin.
I mean, Princeton always was in a position to attract Rabin students.
So you were there at the same time as Rabin?
Yeah.
He was one year older.
So he was Church's student as well?
Yeah.
All of our teachers were Church's students.
And then to talk about, I mean, Church's lectures were incredibly boring.
Raymond Smullyan was very good at parodying Church's style.
You know, like saying, after proving something in the propositional calculus, he said, well, I could prove the converse by saying you interchange P and Q, but we'll do it again.
That was Church's extremely over-careful style of doing things.
So, much greater influence was Kleene who came.
Church had a sabbatical and Kleene came for a year, so that was much more exciting.
What year was that, do you remember?
So that must have been about.
.
.
That was just the year before the famous.
.
.
Cornell.
Cornell.
That was the summer of 57, I guess.
Yeah.
Right.
So, Leany was there on sabbatical of 56, 57, and then we all went to Cornell.


SPEAKER_00: 0:39:36-0:39:42
Uh-huh.
But at Cornell, Tarski created you as his student.


SPEAKER_01: 0:39:43-0:39:50
Did he?
Even then?
It was my sense.
That Cornel Tarski was calling you his student.
Do you remember that, Dan?


SPEAKER_00: 0:39:52-0:39:54
Or part of his group.


SPEAKER_01: 0:39:56-0:40:31
Yeah.
Well, I guess, I mean, I guess I.
.
.
His circle, yes?
His circle, yeah.
In fact, I guess one of the papers on infinitary logic, we had a joint paper on infinitary logic there.
You and Tartke.
Yeah.
So you were exchanging letters with him?
Well, after that first year, as I say, we had to approach more.


SPEAKER_00: 0:40:31-0:40:35
And then you were pretty close, I guess.
I met him correspondingly, so I met him.


SPEAKER_01: 0:40:55-0:46:11
Can you describe his influence on you, just in terms of the way you work, the kind of problems you chose?
I think his greatest influence was his style and his intellectual power.
I mean, he really had a certain way of trying to explain things and to formulate things.
I mean, he made fun of things like expressing everything in terms of arithmetic classes and things like that.
He was pedantic in some ways, but on the other hand, he had a very clear, clean way of constructing things.
His lectures and proofs and all that were always extremely good to listen to.
He may be lectured with cigarettes, but he also lectured practically without notes and always carefully prepared what he was going to say.
It was always a great pleasure to get the sort of architectomics of the way that he put things together.
And later, so that was a foundational influence.
Yeah, and also Tarski had a great concern to separate the deeper things from the trivial things too.
He warned me many times not to work on little problems.
And that, would you call that an early influence, or that was a later?
I'm trying to get a sense of how he was early on and then later.
I mean, he was the first major researcher that I ever got close to, right?
Right.
So, I mean if you want to characterize the sort of teacher image.
You have some good teachers, but then there's the teacher.
The mentor.
That's great.
Yeah.
And later, did he have important influence on you?
Let's say, you know, after you yourself were established as somebody, did he continue to influence you?
influence you?
I think the greatest, the first greatest mistake I made.
The first greatest mistake I ever made.
I mean, we were discussing the psychodynamics of my running away as a graduate student, but actually that was a help.
I mean, things happen accidentally.
You fall into certain things.
But in the end you think it was good.
It was good.
Yeah, right.
So I met Halmos in Princeton, the year he was at the Institute.
That was his influence that got me the job at Chicago as an instructor.
That was my first job.
Now Halmos didn't like Tarski.
Halmos had a totally love-hate relation with Tarski.
The reason is that Tarski could prove so many more theorems than Halmos could.
Halmos was always sort of following along.
His things on Boolean algebras and his things on polyadic things had many neat features to them, but he didn't make any major discoveries.
And so I think that was.
.
.
I don't think that he thought that Tarski thought so very much of him.
I almost didn't think Tarski thought much of him.
Helmholtz didn't think Tarski thought much of him.
So to reciprocate.
.
.
Even though I might personally think that Helmholtz's approach to polyonic algebra was more interesting than cylindric algebra in many ways.
If only we had known more about category theory, it probably could have been much better altogether.
But I mean, Hamos had a lot of good mathematical taste, and I learned a lot from him and from his books and so on, because he was a beautiful expositor.
But he wasn't a very original mathematician.
Do you think his dislike of Tarski was a certain jealousy?
Yeah.
I mean, there can be a lot of different reasons why he would feel that way.
So, Halmas was very disappointed I left Chicago, but the reason that I left was that A.
Adrian Albert told me, point blank, that there wasn't any hopeless promotion there.


SPEAKER_00: 0:46:11-0:46:12
Who told you?


SPEAKER_01: 0:46:12-0:46:15
Albert.
Albert, the A.
Albert.
The chair of the department.


SPEAKER_00: 0:46:15-0:46:27
And you think Albert was wrong?
When you say it was a mistake?


SPEAKER_01: 0:46:27-0:46:41
Well, the mistake was to come to Berkeley at that point.
For you, your mistake was to leave Chicago and go back to Berkeley.
Tarski was too strong.


