SPEAKER_01: 0:00:00-0:01:17
Well, he's totally out of I'd like to know if anybody knows where he's alive.

He was in the worst part of earth.

CC, where was he?

Well, he lives somewhere near Saugus.

I know that's what I remember there could be nearby, but I don't think it's any different.

So it's a very dangerous place.

But he had already sort of given all logic and all that up quite a while ago.

Yeah.

And yeah, but at that time he was kind of saying that he was going to come back up here.

Oh, really?

And present more on his paper about solving a problem of Irish.

You know what I'm talking about?

No.

Gene joke.

This girl who's very good in practice except through Gene Rubin?

No, no, no, very good.

I can't think of any one.

Anyway, it doesn't matter, but he was he told me that he would be up here the next spring and had a good conversation.

Well, he got pretty heavily into some kind of casting substance, didn't he?

I think religion, religion.

I think religion, but maybe also some drug.

Maybe marijuana.

SPEAKER_00: 0:01:17-0:01:19
Could be nobody could be marijuana.

SPEAKER_01: 0:01:19-0:02:00
But nobody ever said that.

No.

I think maybe when he was before he married.

And now he got into some kind of zen And now he goes back to India every tourist.

Zen religion type of thing.

Yeah.

I don't know whether they use marijuana or not.

Zen?

I don't think so.

I don't think so either.

Delicious.

So Vatarski never asked you to do any of his work.

He never asked me, but he certainly didn't ask me ten.

I was knew what he was giving Dana to do.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:00-0:02:00
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:01-0:02:39
I think that I had been there so long he had to get rid of me.

What about running errands or just sort of general gopher stuff?

No, it wasn't No, nothing like that.

Of course there's a way of dealing with that.

Yeah, what's your don't know I don't know how I do it, but I do it.

I see.

You just you don't answer something like that.

I think it is true that some people get caught unnecessarily.

Sure.

You never say anything.

Right.

Dana, what Dana does is to Dana gets through it eventually because what Dana does is do say he'll do it.

And then after a year and a half has gone by, it doesn't do it.

SPEAKER_00: 0:02:39-0:02:39
Right.

SPEAKER_01: 0:02:40-0:05:20
Yeah, yeah.

Yeah, that's what it whereas you just don't say anything.

You don't say it.

I don't know what it is, but Montague wasn't too good at wasn't too good at saying no.

Right?

Well, Saul certainly wasn't good at saying no.

I don't know whether you got asked as much.

I mean, I didn't run super as bad as they were.

Yeah.

Peter he picked on me the way he did on him.

Tom Fran was the one who I felt was put upon to do a lot for Tarski.

I can see him just accepting it though his personality.

Well, what about Steve?

I mean, it wasn't his student, but Steve did everything for Tarkey.

And I don't think Steve had to.

No.

He didn't have to No, he didn't nobody had to.

It's just that some people Leon Hinken felt that he was, you know, way, way, way taken advantage of and worked to death.

He said he never dreamed of saying no, and that anything Tarski ever asked him to do was something he was always willing to do.

You know, and I said totally lost.

He was willing to do what Tarski asked him to do because it was Tarski.

But he would thought it was right.

He himself would never have dreamed of asking people to do for him the things that Tarski asked him to do.

And when I asked Jeanette, do you think Tarski overworked Leon?

She said, Do I fail?

Of course he did.

And Leon too was eventually getting some for different reasons, but was eventually getting some kind of ulcer symptoms or something.

I mean, the man made up of people.

That would be a lot different because this is when he's a Yeah, he's an eight associate professor.

Right, exactly.

That's terrible.

You don't have to be I'm not putting judgments on all these things.

I'm simply trying to No argue with you.

Elicit picture, that's all and see who did what and what?

I know Steve was around him when he was a lot older and sick.

I know and he was helping And he may have felt people feeled to, obviously, I think Leon wanted to too.

Not that Leon didn't want to, but you just there are things you want to do and then you find yourself enmeshed and you do more if it turns out to be more than you bargained for.

SPEAKER_00: 0:05:20-0:05:20
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:05:22-0:05:55
Leon is a much more I don't know something that's simple about a good administrator.

Right administrator good person who gets things done than anyone we mentioned.

Right.

Right.

And it makes it a little harder to feel sorry for him.

If he had all that ability I don't think he felt sorry for himself.

SPEAKER_00: 0:05:55-0:05:56
I don't think he felt sorry.

SPEAKER_01: 0:05:57-0:06:50
I never thought so I never thought he did.

But he did a I mean he realizes that he did a tremendous amount of work for him perhaps in retrospect at expense of what kind of work he might have done on his own.

I mean, Leon is somebody who said he never did work as good his thesis was the best piece of work he ever did and he never did anything better than that.

Now maybe that was in the cards to begin with.

two mathematicians out of ten or five Yeah right?

That's always said anyway.

Yeah, but you're trying to make always put the best face on things and people don't always want to do that.

In other words, you're trying to excuse everything.

It isn't true anyway.

I mean I have a hundred or fifty times read in French said in French or said to Leon directly.

SPEAKER_00: 0:06:50-0:06:50
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:06:51-0:19:40
But some of his other papers such as the paper on Omega completeness were better than anything in his thesis.

Yeah but anyways But he isn't saying that himself by that time he himself is under evaluating his exactly.

Right and during that period probably four or five years after his thesis he was really doing very good work.

If you do a really good thesis you're so impressed with that the fact that you manage to do that it probably on your mind than I'm sure it does.

I'll never be able to do this then you're supposed to be a professional and you know you're supposed to be just doing it and probably the attitude is a little different.

But I mean it's certainly true that a number of mathematicians do special thesis work and then don't ever go on to do anything better and it's hard to know what it is that what are the factors you never know what the factors are in the first place that enable you to do it's all kind of like magic yes but you're going to ask Bob about what it took to get thesis I was getting there.

So you go ahead and you ask some questions.

So what was your experience?

What did it take to do work that Tarsky considered a thesis?

I think that's difficult for all folks what does it take to do work that I consider normal?

What does it take to do work that you consider otherwise?

It's very complicated and you change and you feel bad about what happened with one so you're easier on the next one and so on and so forth.

I'm not sure what you mean how to identify.

What?

He wanted you to do the Did you solve some problems and say in your own mind think that that ought to do for a thesis and Tarski that I saw the author of this problem was in my thesis on the little problem some when I solved it this one I thought it was about the best thing I'd ever learn.

Which was that?

The one that we loved.

He thought so you didn't have to convince him that this was worthy.

He recognized it right away.

He was worried about my illness.

Yeah.

Maybe I'll get better job.

Yeah.

So it's pretty And Kelly had actually gone to him I don't know how far back a year or two or three back and offered to put Kelly's in my junk paper together with things I'd already know Kashki so I could get out.

So I think you were I didn't want to do I want to get something better than you were a unique case of somebody who I mean because it's Saul's impression that Tarthi kept hanging on to people and wanting them to do more, more, more, whereas in your case he was saying enough already came for years.

I was that for years Yeah but he really he proposed to you when Kelly came with his proposal Well he proposed to me that he would say he would agree accepted it didn't sound very awful.

Yeah, but he would accept it.

Whereas I think in no other case would he have accepted something like that.

Well relate your experience for example Well you first had me working on cylindric algebra and the problem was the representation theorem for infinite dimensional cylindric algebras and after working on that for some time I came up with a proof which looked very much like the proof of completeness of predicate logic.

And he wasn't satisfied with that because he felt that there ought to be a more algebraic proof but that was up till then I had thought in his mind that this was a significant problem that ought to be a part of the thesis if not the whole thing.

At that point this thing that had approved someone like this that's the thing you're talking about.

The significant problem was this one Yeah just that one I mean I was never cared for so many your gougebased and I only did it because he assigned it to me as a problem.

It was only after that that I started to come up well then he put me on the problem of decidability of the theory of ordinals under addition and I worked on that for a long time and got side results some of which fed into our joint paper and he didn't also my results about planite products, finite sums and products and preservation under equivalents again which I thought should be something that he ought to have been interested in.

He never seemed to respond positively to that.

All along when I do something Well that's a kind of a guaranteed thing it's guaranteed to be an acceptable result I'm not talking about the thesis, it's guaranteed to be an interesting result even though it's not very difficult in some ways very good result.

Well but it's hard I was disappointed in his response and I don't know why he did respond in that way.

In fact you remember the Cornell Conference We had done our work on generalized products together and I asked we talked about what we might talk about at the conference and I said well I would like to talk about this and instead he wanted me to talk about the back and forth method of Fry Say and Erin Floyd which wasn't my work and so I never understood why he didn't take to this stuff that we had done or that I had done anyhow my part of it on products when I thought So you know that had nothing to do with my thesis and it ended up there was nothing in my thesis It was all on Leon arithmetic arithmetic Yeah And that was part of Leon wasn't it?

That was working with Leon while he was away in Europe So then go on about that Go on about the end Well so then it was a question after I have done a number of things on that that I thought these are really adding up to a thesis and Leon was very encouraging but it was a question of getting Tarski's approval and Tarski kept hemming and hawing and hemming and hawing and so the question was well what would take him to give his approval because I was determined to finish.

I wasn't going to at that point As you remember by this time Saul had been away in the army and back and you know like the things I did and what I was capable of doing was just totally different and you know I felt I'm ready to be born the feeling that be out on my own.

He said well we'll ride Mustovsky and ask his opinion of the work on arithmetization and so I knew that so I sent Mastovsky the work and descriptions of the results and proofs and so on and Mastovsky thought it was quite interesting and he said so and he said he thought it was worthy of a thesis.

Even then Tarski wasn't sure Yeah but so he let it go my feeling that it could have dragged on forever if I hadn't strange maybe you're talking to too.

Yeah, but I think this is not I mean so it's all's case the way then I think it's not unique.

I think there were other people who had the same thing.

It was never enough.

It was very difficult to satisfy him but I think your situation was really different.

I see that you think it was In this context No, so you think it's the same that it was very difficult to satisfy him?

It's you that think that's bad.

I think No, I'm not saying it's bad or good.

I'm just saying I think of I think that certainly most professors in Berkeley at any rate let their students off way too easy and unless they're very good they'll have a pretty pitiful short slide because they haven't really had enough experience.

Right.

So how were you with your students?

Were you as hard on your students?

I remember one other thing you said that I bet applies to you but never said listening to this or about four years after three years after I got my PhD Karski said to me in some context and maybe reasonable to be saying it was that he had a much better opinion of my thesis now than he had had four years ago.

And that really had not changed Well I thought so there's nothing matter with that.

No, no, but I think And I bet that's so he certainly acted very respectful to you all those years and I bet part of it wasn't even coccid right there.

I mean don't you have that feeling with some of those students?

Did you change your opinion as time goes on?

Oh sure definitely.

So how were you with your students?

Were you very difficult?

I mean did they think of you as difficult?

Well in logic most people in Berkeley are in logic their students take the longest of anybody in Berkeley put us up but so and you're no different than any other person in logic.

Well Hankin's students don't take forever do they?

Hankin hasn't had but one student.

Who was his student?

Do you think?

Girls.

Huh?

No who was Hankin's student?

Somebody who worked with Tarsky I don't think she won the other degree in education with Hank?

Ng did.

Ng really students.

It's so cheap.

You may not even have heard of her because it's cheap.

Somebody who went to SF State afterwards I think they did.

default: 0:19:41-0:19:41
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:19:42-0:19:45
I don't know where she was.

No she's not there.

What's her name?

SPEAKER_00: 0:19:46-0:19:46
Yeah.

default: 0:19:48-0:19:48
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:19:51-0:20:33
Hankin only had one student or only one who finished.

Well, he had very few students until ten years ago zero I think and then he may have had one in mathematics and one or two in education.

So I guess anybody who thought they were going into logic thought they had to work with Tarski or something like that.

That's amazing.

Yeah.

Well that was Leon or that wasn't Tarski No, no I understand.

Whose student was always trying to sort of encourage Leon.

Leon asked very selfcomflaging.

SPEAKER_00: 0:20:34-0:20:34
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:20:35-0:21:25
Usually you're in the position of asking him for advice or yeah I was always trying to encourage him just see how good his work was.

Yeah he has to continue and work his other work he's very good at this other work and I think he received a fifty thousand dollars for all since Who was he?

National traveling all over the world.

Yeah so yeah he's doing very well.

Oh he's doing well but you know just in this what we're talking about now is doing he's doing something different than what we're talking about right at this moment.

Whose student was Solovey?

Bob Solovey.

He was McLean's student wasn't it?

I see.

default: 0:21:25-0:21:25
Yeah.

SPEAKER_01: 0:21:26-0:35:24
No, I don't know about them no, I don't know you think so yes Well I was in Chicago No you know you know who else was the playing story?

Who?

The road?

Michael Morley?

Michael Morley, right?

Yeah.

What you say that with a little twinkle in your eyes I think because he got him to go back to into work again.

I got on a plane somewhere.

I went on the way to Poland and the only other person I knew on the plane no just by accident McLean's on the plane.

I don't think I'd ever met him.

But he's a very nice guy and he recognized me and invited me to come and sit with him.

And oh I know I was always trying to funny my since Morley had written most of the thesis with India and then came after that really started almost before he really back too much he came and spent two years in Brooklyn.

Morally did.

Morally did.

But I felt absolutely nothing bad about it.

I liked the claim and he was very nice and what he did is absolutely right.

That's another thing you can do as a graduate as a thesis of is take credit for someone else to a great extent.

There's nothing the matter with it.

If you start out in a certain way and get you must take credit for what's been done I know he got he done for one thing he doesn't want Morley to come back to school after ten years and you know there are all these things so Morley had worked with you ever had a student who sort of drifted off to someone else but he's still sort of you've done something for them.

Well they just got you too clear whether you should do one of it.

Why do you think he had another big time with McQueen and that was when Yershoff was here when Yershoff was here had a big fight on this campus then he went directly next to Chicago and McLean wrote articles in the Chicago Newspaper?

No, the mathematical write articles in the Notice about a long time after McClinton was very strong.

But in what direction Which direction should have She should have let them talk.

Yes we should have just let him talk and well they will talk.

McLean was always very concerned to keep politics out of the Mat society and this with this being one case What was Tarski's position on that?

Do you remember?

No I remember I took him to see Tarski to see if the three of us together could work anything out.

Yeah we didn't He didn't So Tarski was bitterly opposing his doing anything.

Tarski was very much opposed to Yershov doing speaking Five years earlier both Tarski and I were in Moscow and Yershov did everything for us.

Yeah.

And Tarsi didn't mind then that Yershov was antiSimilica.

Well maybe he is antiSemitica.

Yeah, he did anti Similar.

And I might not vote to bring him here to this country but once he was invited by the State Department Did I see you then when I went I went down to Stanford again?

No, I wasn't here at that time And I went to Preizals and some other people came over.

But Stanford was just seemed like a green compared to Yeah and UCLA had no problem with it.

Oscarbakus said well Gershov had been very hospitable to him and a Greek always returns hospitality But I think there were some particularly egregious episodes that came to everyone's attention just before then whereas at the time that you were all being well treated in Moscow by Yerschov, these were not well were not known or maybe even hadn't happened.

Yes, Caesar's adviser was the most famous logician in Russia and the second most famous anti sin logic.

Yeah, he was the first dear the first he thought of the tenth.

Yeah, his name was all those numbers here.

Vingrata Vinongrata was yeah yeah But I mean it can't be the Tarski But Maltv and Malsett was at all these bars we had Tarski and Malt were just Well Tarski was a Catholic, you know, he wasn't a Jew.

You should think of leaving in about ten minutes Okay well I'll give you some fruit and you'll be on your way.

Well I'm going to go with you.

Oh you are right I can't ride OK, you can't walk down good and then how will you get back?

Well Marilyn is Marilyn going to come down to dinner?

Oh okay are you we're going to go to dinner?

Are you going to go or having huh?

Yes you are so Marilyn will come down or will Marilyn not go?

Okay I don't know she still has to Oh come on down Marilyn since this I don't have any excuse for rehearsal office I'd rather heat already was here obviously Right yeah I think it was making it probably making waves trying to make waves, trying to make an issue out of something like this so that it would be called to people's attention.

I mean, I think it had probably less to do with Yerschov than the issue of anti Semitism in the US Well they hated him.

I'm sure they hated him too, but I think it had a lot to do with him.

A lot to do with him, but it probably had a lot to do with antiSemitism in the Soviet Union at that time which everybody wanted to talk about I think.

So a couple of years ago I talked to this famous young student of Yoshi Zilberg?

Yes it was clear that he was a very queer thinker.

Was he a Jew?

He was Jews and Yosha gave him thesis he did positive Yeah not ah Not from Silbert Yeah.

Well the one He wasn't mad at me, I mean I mean figured I didn't know what I was doing Yeah Well the one who was the worst that I ever heard about Yirschov was this guy that I can't stand anyway but and so I used to not credit in the old day way back before everybody was talking about Yerschev, I discounted what he said Gerrave it Gerrave it because I just cannot stand Gerave it?

Gerrave it Oh gorve it Gorrave it But I really can't stand it but he attributed all his troubles in Russia to Yerschov.

Yerschev got chosen for things that he didn't get chosen for and Yirchov manipulated against him and all that and it was all because he was a Jew and I thought he was using this as an excuse because he doesn't want to Well maybe it does But he was the first one we heard stories from show Right yeah and then but as I say I was discounting it because of Gurevich because of Gurevich being Gurevich but may you know it's not necessarily so it may have all been true too.

I still don't like Gurevich, but what he said may have been the case.

I'm thinking out of two Israelis young maybe forty young one of them had cancer Now or did three years ago when I'm showing I'm not sure I'm talking about now but what about them well somebody that had cancer and they I'm sure you know I can just think But are they related to Tarski in some way or just logic?

Yeah no population yeah You're not thinking of Shellah No Gavin No they're younger and they're not as good as old as Stavi and beautiful fruit Marilyn we need spoons I think we need spoons for our fruit Oh absolutely fried thyme Well we could do it This is some clotted cream which I didn't get chance to beat When are you going to retire Son?

Well right now never but how long have you been retired?

Two and a third years ninety one And do you teach at all?

I can.

Well sometimes you get called back Yeah but there are ten of us retired at the same time and none of us has ever been given any job Well they told us to make us retire We would get some half a semester a semester the first year slowed down.

Are you sorry about that?

I didn't care too much between the alternatives.

Yeah I mean I don't like to be cheated like that Yeah anyone like sugar, brown sugar?

You just love it like you So even though you haven't been called back to teach them you I know you don't care about I mean I know you're happy that you're retired That's correct, isn't it?

I think about if I hadn't been able to stay on until I was seventy.

You would have?

Everything is mass stable Here is a good place to get out of it.

I sort of got that in advance The dead hidden is I thought the stable I see you want some clean though I might not I don't feel close talking I feel quite close to They told us nobody else would be given this opportunity that we're getting this extra money we have Yeah and they've had two more than Extra opportunity There's nobody left in the department anymore.

Everybody's retired, huh?

Yeah and they're only very young people Is that true?

Who's the oldest person in the department?

Addison?

Is that right?

You're talking about no they're not talking about logic In logic or other Addison told me the other day that he and one are older people left in logic or in the whole department but the other wasn't in logic so I'm not sure Well like what's happened to Smile?

Did he retire?

I don't know The last time I was here for the Tarsky lectures he was talking about and he taken early retirement Mohurt, did he retire?

Wait a minute Mo did he?

I know more about Smale.

Smael kept saying that he could retire even at age sixty or fifty five or whatever and make a big killing because he would get full salary wherever he went after If he got a job yeah But he was somebody told me that he finally did apply a year or two ago No I mean that's what a lot of people have thought they retire and then they'd go somewhere else and there's so many people that's right, nobody's hiring anything.

That's fine straight.

Well I mean there's a surplus of geniuses Hersh retired either now or a month from now Well how old are you, Bob?

How old were you when you retired?

Let's put that way.

sixty five You retired at sixty five And you didn't have to at that point you could have stayed on till sixty eight or possibly forever because at Stanford there was a line at a certain point you had to retire but past that past that everyone was time Sometime ago Okay nine people were up the same as I was retired and made that decision and they all retired that they were giving that's a good and honest thing though do you know of anyone who was sorry they chose that route and wish they had I don't know what you mean in logic?

Anybody?

I mean everybody Thomas they didn't do opposite Thomas is going to teach for nothing Don't you say?

Thomas Who?

SPEAKER_00: 0:35:24-0:35:25
Emory Thomas?

SPEAKER_01: 0:35:25-0:36:51
No, not Emory Thomas there were some people that said that I thought they was It was Henry Helson Oh Henry Hilson Henry Hilson is trying to get him to let him teach at seminar and nothing So he really wanted to yeah he wanted to go he wanted to go to France to get an offer Yeah France for a job for maybe a year or more Uh huh And what happened?

And what's his wife's name?

Ravenna Ravenna said that she wouldn't go that she was just in her best Best years he's been kind of depressed Well he's really perfectly happy.

Yeah What they have to learn to do is something else but it just is enjoyable.

It's hard to enjoy that you can do the mathematic.

Yeah Of course I mean I think what do you think?

Do you think you'd miss the contact with students?

You can do that in most universities you can do that as a member I mean you can have a thesis student Yeah no I think that meant I'm getting a little tired of teaching but I think I miss the teaching.

I certainly miss advanced teaching and hope.

