SPEAKER_00: 0:00:00-0:32:49
 The very end of 60, let's see, so the first year was 68, 69, the second year was 69, 70.  So I guess it was the very end of 69, beginning of 70, I can't remember exactly, but it was sort of around, well during the break, around Christmas, so around Christmas, New Year,  I may have actually, I can't remember exactly, but that old laptop was just the beginning  of the year. Anyway, so, and I'm pretty sure, I can't remember, but it was sort of the default  of staying with him and we were sort of trying to, I mean, he wanted to know what he'd been doing he also wanted to know a little bit  what I'd been doing  and this was  after I hope this fits  the timetable  after this whole Angela Davis  thing already happened  so I asked him also about that  I never really met her  I may have seen her once  in the department  before so I don't really met her. I mean, I may have seen her once in the department, in the four, so I don't really know her.  But the whole business was international news at that point.  It was something like, I'm not a judge of her intellectual qualities, but this is a matter of principle, so we all stood by her and he was entirely in support of this, which  of course is different from thinking that she was doing use of philosophy.  But so just a support of what you were saying.  He certainly was among the people in the department,  I don't know of any exceptions, who entirely endorsed this department's decision to stand by Hunt.  Yeah, the only one that may not have endorsed it based on… I mean, again, I don't  have direct evidence of that. By the way, when you met with Richard, probably he was  in the midst of the big clash with Kilish because of the file.  Could well be.  I mean, he must have never mentioned that.  Yeah, which is, you know, despite all this, he was able to like make the point that, you  know, although I know that Kilish is behind their hire, I recognize their intellectual  qualities and that that's not the direction which I want to go.  The only person that may have not, because I think my, if I remember, I have all the  files and I talked to Kaplan about this, but so what happened at a certain point is that  Davis was prevented from receiving a salary, from being rehired and being paid despite  number one, the contract that she had and number two, the fact that there was no power for... Because this famous claim by the... So we're talking about the  time when the governor of California was Ronald Reagan, and he put pressure on the Board of  Regents to claim that no public official of California could have been or could be a member of the Communist Party.  This was claimed  to be a law  but the law  did not exist.  So that was  the big falling apart  of that legal case  and that's why  in the end  she was restated  because there was  no legal basis for that.  But for one year  she received no salary.  And so there was  what UCLA faculty did  voluntarily  gave part of their salaries but there was what UCLA faculty did, voluntarily, gave part of their salaries.  But there was a volunteer act.  I have no direct evidence that Montego did or did not.  My understanding is that he did, he participated to that.  I couldn't imagine that he wouldn't have.  Yeah.  The only person that I believe did not do that, at least the only person relevant for  us that did not do that was Alonzo  Church.  Alonzo Church also was involved in a case that probably was the department worked around  to avoid an escalation of the case, given the figure and the profile that of...  I mean, I never met Alonzo Church, so you know him.  So what happened, these are the facts that I was able to reconstruct.  I believe in the office, the office of the philosophy department,  some people, including the black secretary,  had put a poster or an image or something concerning the black liberation movement or black rights and so on.  One day, Alonzo Church came to  the department, saw that, and got unusually upset. It doesn't sound like it was typical  of him. And he went and…  Tore it off the wall.  Yes, off the wall saying, what is this doing here? This is a philosophy department, and so on. This was reported to the chair.  And that's where I noticed the chair that at that time must have been probably Montgomery.  I would imagine.  They decided to engage with the staff and talk to Alonzo Church rather than bringing  the case up.  We do have letters and discussion at the faculty meeting of this episode that confer the story  that she told me.  Based on this, I believe that…  I do know that Alonso Church, together with Richard Montague, were probably not the only  ones but were among the minority that voted against  the hiring.  Originally.  Originally.  That was a pure intellectual discussion about is this the kind of philosophy that we want  to endorse.  So for sure Montague, for sure Church, I believe another one or two votes against and the other  were in favor.  But that's different from there.  That's a different story. So that fits  with the picture of Montague keeping the two levels very separate. There is an issue concerning  intellectual choices. What kind of people, what kind of philosophy do you want to do?  And then there is an issue about intellectual capacities. And third, an issue about racial discrimination.  The anecdote in the way Keilish was telling the story, translated, was a kind of…  You know that memory can act as a way to relieve pain or relieve regrets that you have?  To me, it sounds totally like that.  There's something in Ke Kalish that felt bad  about the way he behaved towards Richard,  maybe even towards black people for certain aspects.  And so the story is a way to, clearly,  the story is told in a way that makes Montague shy  and Kalish is diminished by making a claim without really understanding.  And notice the context. So he's talking to Anita Fefferman. They knew each other, but  they were no friends. So it's not like my best friend, my best buddy. And he knew that  this would be recorded. There was a recorder there with the old tapes. So he knew that  that would be recorded. And he wanted to go on record.  He wanted to go on record. And he was already, Anita confirmed that he was already sick.  And then David told me that his sickness went on for a while, so he was not teaching anymore.  So you are at the end of your life, essentially. You feel it. And here there is somebody who  allows you to tell a story about that past.  Of course, I wish that the university had kept its material, but there's no archive.  Yes, there are.  No, no.  I mean, but I can only imagine the kind of letters that they must have exchanged at a  certain point, especially when Montague was still in Berkeley and Kalish  was already in LA and how that changed over time. It would have been a beautiful window  inside also Richard's emotional space with somebody he trusted fully, which is kind of  rare. But you know, that's the limit of writing biographies. You work with what you have.  I think we are already lucky to have enough of what Montague did intellectually  to be as faithful as possible to that. And that to me is a really important, exciting aspect of the enterprise. I was hoping to be able to get a sense of  not just the ideas that he had, but how he  developed those ideas.  And I think I got there.  I feel comfortable about it.  And then at the same time, I didn't want these ideas to be ideas coming from a computer.  It was a human being.  So how did that human being that was able to produce those ideas do that?  What kind of human being was behind it? What kind of, you know, from a certain  point of view, if you think about, you know, intellectual ideas I think played a very important  role in Richard's life. They were probably the area where he felt the most under control.  He did not fear them. He was fearless for certain aspects.  He loved to play with ideas, to see where ideas go, to be extremely critical and fight  for ideas, to be totally empowered.  And that's something that probably...  Remember last night, I kept thinking about the remark that you made about, I thought  that Bob was exploiting him, and probably there was a component of that.  I told you about all the things that Montague was buying, and the box that I found, all  the checks that were like, belt for Montague, pants for Bob, dance class for Bob, and this  for Bob.  But probably Bob was a human being that in his own special way, contorted and complex,  he had a very proud childhood.  I mean, it was not an easy life to live, what that Bob had.  Showed affection, genuine affection for who Richard was, not because he could understand  who he was intellectually, but as a human being.  And when you're so desperately lacking that experience, because as a little kid you're  being mistreated, you know, mommy and daddy, okay, fine.  But then beyond that, you will be bullied and the only way that you have to protect  yourself is to be on top.  And, you know, find somebody who's willing to be with you, that is sharing space with  you, is living with you.  It doesn't matter how much you have to fight.  That's somebody who's there for you, you're not alone.  Yeah. So as far as these two sides are concerned,  so one, two, that we also talked about quite a bit already yesterday.  And bringing up again now.  These things, both these trips to Oldford Boulevard,  and also other things, they really felt to me  as a kind of break out of that other side of him, sort of. When this system of control sort of relaxes, then something quite unexpected can happen.  And it is a very small anecdote.  So after these seminars of his, we would, a small group would usually go out for dinner.  And so, I can't remember how it was, but very often there were several people in one  car and some other people in other cars.  And there was one occasion where it was after a seminar where he had been as brilliant and controlled as he normally was.  And we went to this restaurant and Richard broke out in a diatribe againstherwydd rhywun sy'n gweithio yn y restaurant, roedd yn ddifrifol. Roedd yn  hollol anhygoel ac yn hollol ddim yn ddifrifol. Roedden ni i gyd wedi bod yno until it was over and then went into the back and so Barry Smith and his friend  he was also part of this group you must probably have come across him  Lung Ok Chan. Oh yeah, sure, I contacted him.  Oh you did actually, yeah, okay. And one other person was there, me and, and I can't remember who was driving me,  Richard.  And so at a moment, it was just before we got into the car, Perry said,  Well, you just can't be rational all the time. And it's sort of summarizing, it's a total contrast.  Yeah, I think that was his dimension.  But that also shows the amount of energy that he was going into  that act of performance when he was teaching. And that probably was totally unconscious.  It was so mechanical for him but that doesn't mean it was costless. You pay a  fee and like yeah related to this I didn't finish telling when we're talking  about like and how he carefully was on campus, the very same secretary told me that Richard  was quite open with her and she knew that first of all he was gay and they had… because  they were joking about black guys.  What happened is that one day one of her cousins came to stop by, was it you, Celestia? One of the…  One of her cousins, the secretary's cousin, a black guy, young black guy, good-looking,  came to say hi to her.  And just after that, Montague passed by and says hi to her.  So the young guy, her cousin, the secretary's cousin, sees Richard.  And then when Richard is gone, and later actually outside the office, she says, he asked me, but who is that guy? Oh, it was a very important professor in our department.  His name is Richard Bond. Ah, okay. No, because I was on  Malibu or the beach area at one of the restrooms and there was him that made a step towards me and I just said,  go away and he left, if you don't mind. So you see that completely like so there's no evidence,  nobody has ever told me that Richard behaved on campus in a way that was not just perfectly acceptable, impeccable towards the students, towards even  like in particular graduate students really liked him.  Like especially because they were coming from probably impressions of him from the colloquium  talks where he could be very aggressive and then in the class he would be available.  I could go and talk to him in the office hours.  More than one person told me, the first time I went to talk to him, I was so frightened,  like, that he would just basically destroy me, criticize me, and actually say,  well, no, actually, you know, you should read this, and then maybe you can come back and tell me.  So, there was this kind of behavior, impeccable and perfect,  and then a very different behavior outside,  which was also what these gay people  were mainly condemned to.  There was no other.  And Richard, of course, I think, reached an extreme level because the two dimensions were  extreme.  On the one hand, very few jobs would demand that kind of intellectual commitment and total  focus and impeccable behavior like being a professor.  First of all, because as a professor you're surrounded by human beings, you're surrounded  by young human beings and you have a situational power among them.  And that's what heterosexual colleagues were doing, were taking advantage of that.  But that comes at a cost and then you have these losses of control.  I heard other stories about this, like, you know, completely losing control and exploding  for basically no reason.  So that I think was a little bit the dichotomy that emerges from… and so I think in the  end this behavior or the behavior you saw with Bob was another  manifestation of this. On the one hand, I think there was really what could be called  love in their own way. I think they really cared about each other.  I mean, you see this with so many cases of heterosexual pairs who destroy each other's  life on the one hand and can't detect themselves. heterosexual pairs who destroy each other's life and  can't  detect  themselves  and you  know I  told you  the episode  when the  detective  went to  the one  that reopened  the cold  case  this was  in 2006  so Bob  was still  alive and  doing great  so the  detective  remembers  yeah I  remember  this very  vivid memory  of the  time I  went to  interview  he was  there at  the time of the murder.  Yeah.  So, no, no, no.  This is the Latino detective Gutierrez that was in the cold case unit that in early 2000  reopened all the unsolved homicide cases in Los Angeles.  I see.  And just because of alphabetical order, he was given the act.  I see.  And Montague was like…  And so I said, the procedure was for us, you look at the material and you put it into since  they were started using computers and databases.  If there was any kind of evidence that wouldn't match, and this was fingerprints.  They created this huge fingerprints database and a bunch of names came up.  These were fingerprints taken by, notice that they  took the fingerprints from Montague's bedroom, but nobody took the fingerprints from the car.  Can you believe it? Even after they found the car?  The car was found near the Greyhound bus station.  Yeah, there's one of these cases where you sort of jump out and let it run against the wall. Yeah, exactly.  And so nobody took the fingerprint.  Anyway, and so he was telling me that he went to, since one of the fingerprints was Bob's,  and he said, you know, I contacted him, we set an appointment, I went to see him at his  place and he said, I have this very good memory of this very gentle, elderly, but in perfect shape black man, who welcomed me very nicely, we talked about,  but he became progressively more emotional, and at a certain point, he started crying,  and he started crying, and he said, Lucy, you see this ring? This is the one that Richard gave me,  and he was crying, like, you know, it was a strange situation because it was  both tender, but also almost childlike.  Which probably tells a little bit more about  those emotions, really childlike,  that the child desperately wants to be taken care of,  be loved, you know.  But of course, if those emotions don't evolve,  then you're not able to establish  a good relationship with an adult.  You're not an adult if the other person is not an adult. But nevertheless, I think that it was something  very strong and deep that was keeping them together, that kept them until the very end.  And many years later, there was no reason for a doll, but at that point, Montague couldn't pay for anything.  But, you know, and if anything, he did stay in touch with Montague's mother after Montague died.  And Montague's mother left not a huge sum, but he left a certain amount of money.  I found the will.  To him?  To Bob.  To my dear son's friend.  What was his name?  Robert Marcus Lee.  Yeah.  It's in the will.  She left money to various people and it was the sum that she would leave to the people  that were closer to her.  I think it was like $2,000 in 1973.  I think there was, in their own way, there was some attempt to build a relationship coming  from people that had, for different reasons, both emotional traumas and difficulties when  they were growing up.  I mean, Richard came from a loving family, but it was an unusual family to begin with.  And as a family that wants to go up the social scale, the more you go up the  social scale, the more your identity as a gay man is problematic.  Because the higher you are, the deeper you can fall down.  In the case of Bob, adopted child, abandoned.  He was adopted.  It was a complicated story.  Again, we don't know much from what I've been able to reconstruct.  It looks like there was a young black woman in a choir that was basically became pregnant  with a married man who was significantly older.  All black?  Black, yeah.  And so she couldn't keep the kid and she gave the kid for adoption.  The kid was given for adoption in another state, it was a southern state, so in another  state, I think it was Oklahoma.  Yeah, something like that, that's what I remember.  To a couple in which the woman, I still remember, the woman was black and the guy was white  and was an adopter, older than her.  What happened is that the biological mother moved close.  And the two women, when the white doctor dies, they raise the kid together and they move to Los Angeles.  By the time they moved to Los Angeles, a few years, one of them died.  I believe the biological, I don't know if it's the biological mother or the other mother.  And so he's going to be, actually, I believe the biological mother dies.  And he remains alone with this older woman that he calls an aunt.  And he's going to take care of the house and the aunt until she dies.  And I found people that, you know, were teenagers like him, you know, because they moved when he was a kid  to Los Angeles.  I remember from the neighborhood, like, oh yeah, I mean, he was impeccable.  He was able to clean the house way better than we girls were able to.  In the neighborhood, we would call each other when we had to clean houses.  It was a teamwork.  We would always want Bob, because Bob would be perfect in doing this.  He was one of the first ones of us to go to UCLA,  to be admitted to study at UCLA.  So he became an example.  The reason why I went to UCLA is because I saw that Bob went to UCLA.  I see.  And then she became actually a senator in the California Assembly.  I see.  So it was a little bit complicated to get a hold of her.  And then I said, you know, Bob, and that opened up the door and she accepted to receive it.  So how does that jive with an anecdote that Richard told me about Bob, namely that he...  I didn't know there was any adoption involved, but that his parents were a black woman and white man and, or no, actually the  story was he was an Indian, but okay that's already not the same, but that his  mother had one of these claims because of land in,, indeed, that had been given to black people because it  was worthless.  Oh yeah, oh yeah.  You know that story.  Yeah, well…  Is that true?  Well, I don't know about the story about Bob, so please continue what Montague  told you.  Okay, so that family that involved Bob as an adopted child was quite well off because she did the  one thing that was right.  So all these rights that the Indians actually had on land in various places, especially  in Oklahoma that had been given to them in exchange for  stuff that people wanted to have farther east.  So that was one of the places where oil was being found and all these rights were being  denied those people because that was a mistake on our part but we can still sort that out.  And that she actually did the one thing that had any hope of success and did have  success in the end is she went on her own to I think Boston to make a deal  with one of the most effective lawyers in the country.  And he took a case in one of these sort of, if we win, I get half, and if we lose, then  I get nothing.  And she won a very substantial case through the help of this lawyer.  I mean, definitely I did not know anything about this story and I can go and double check  if, because I have some census documents, if the racial background is specified because  you know sometimes like colored would be a label for everything that is not white.  So that's…  Like South Africa.  Yeah.  Oklahoma, I'm very much familiar with the Oklahoma situation.  Also, in case you are interested, there is what I think is one of the, if not the, Martin  Scorsese's masterpiece.  It's the movie that just came out.  I understand.  Yeah.  It's amazing.  It's exactly about that. The tribe was called Osage. The Osage were pushed  from the south where they were to Oklahoma because it was the worst land possible. Then  the oil was discovered. It's really the story. It's not just the story, but the way the story  is told and the visual like  you'll see i don't want to say much more but if you have a chance to see it i saw it right before  leaving i'm looking forward to be back and see it again it's three hours and 26 minutes yeah  i just read about it a couple of days ago it was very very very critical about especially  last things by scorsese here it was in a state of grace and really came out with  something like wow this is what it means to master cinema and master stories and being able to see  multiple layers and how to visualize them. Amazing. So but I didn't know that there was this background  so it's possible that the adoptive mother was actually a native because it's under in the  census it's under in the census  it's I think a little colored and from there I thought color was black but it could be  my mistake. I do know that the biological mother was black for sure also because Bob's  features are the features of a black person.  Yeah, yeah.  And so…  And then the reason why I know that the parents were both black and I know the story of the choir is because I was able to get in touch with the curators of Bob's will.  They were also his best friends until he died.  And this was a kid that Bob was a tutor for much earlier.  I see. He was coming from a fancy Jewish family and they had taken Bob as a house organizer  initially.  But then the mother discovered that Bob had a degree, was able to teach a variety of topics,  and the kid was having problem focusing and so on, and they started and the kid loved  Bob.  And so for several years, he was the tutor.  And then later on, he started and became a lawyer.  He stayed in touch with Bob.  Bob became some sort of like uncle and so on.  And so when he was alone, when he was getting older,  you know, they helped him fix things  and establish his will and so on.  And then once he died, since he had nobody left,  they took care of the thing. So I met with him and his wife and they told me some of the stories and he  was the one that said look what Bob told me is this that you know his biological  mother was became pregnant with an older black guy was married and there was no  way and so she couldn't keep him officially so she gave for adoption but then  she followed him and the adopted family was kind of open to this especially when the guy the white  guy died yeah and so the two women together created a family group and moved away that's  and that's when bob young still relatively young before being a teenager, went to Los Angeles.  And so as a teenager he grew up in the Los Angeles neighborhood of black people and with...  And that's the other thing, because the woman, the senator that I told you, she identified the aunt as black.  But you know, that's an issue of, you know, Bob may have presented her as black, and you know, depending  on the features.  But remember, he had a, you know, he was taking care of his black aunt, and you know, he was  very caring, he was very well organized in the house.  So that's where I got most of the story about Bob, because there is really very little left.  Yeah, I guess.  Except that I know that he graduated from UCLA, and that maybe, and again, I don't have facts to prove that,  he wanted to start a career as a school teacher.  That I once heard too, right.  What actually was his major?  History.  History.  So he would teach, so I think he would teach history,  maybe geography, I don't know.  And again, this is a story would teach history, maybe geography, I don't know. And again,  I don't, this is a story that only one person told me, so I cannot even cross. But the story  was told in a way that he, as soon as he graduated from LA, he started, and after a couple of  years there were several complaints coming from parents about him being a problem for the children.  My understanding is that Bob did not have a very masculine appearance  and I guess it was not too hard by interacting with him  to at least become suspicious that he could be a homosexual.  And now you can imagine.  In those days as a parent, and so he was fired.  And his career was over.  I see. And like there was probably around the time he met Richard because  Bob graduated in 1953 from UCLA. Let's see if it works because it was born in  1928 and he must have graduated when he was 21, no 23, it took a little bit longer to graduate.  And so 23, he was born in 1928, so…  Well, 51.  So 51, but Montague arrived in 55.  So probably maybe he was already without a regular job by the time he met.  They met right away, I think just a couple of months after,  at UCLA, on the UCLA campus. Like the Kirchhoff Coffee House. You remember the, in the Kirchhoff  building, which is the one where you go up the stairs, on the right, the slightly gothic building,  which I think is the oldest coffee place. And there was like, there's a slightly gothic building. Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Which I think is the oldest coffee place on campus.  In case that's so.  And there was a gathering, especially for this alternative community.  I think there was also one of the few transvestite people at that time.  And definitely some black guys.  They were comfortable in the area of campus.  And a friend introduced them to that group.  Hans, thank you very much.  Sorry.

