
Filename:  SC1206_b06_26_b_sl_Hodges.mp3
Date of interview:  July 28th, 1994
Date of transcription:  October 18th, 2025
Transcriber:  Mark Simmons
AF: Anita Feferman
SF: Sol Feferman
WH: Wilfred Hodges

--- BEGIN TRANSCRIPTION ---


AF: 0:00:02-0:00:02 Did you get everything?

SF: Yeah.

WH: 0:00:06-0:03:05 Well now MacIntyre was an interesting suggestion because I couldn't possibly edit my own paper and for this paper I stood down to MacIntyre as editor and MacIntyre was well informed about everything right through and I consulted him in detail.

So I sent him a copy of the thing with this note from Vaught and give it to you and got back a message to the effect "business as usual".

I got a letter from Kleene saying that there were things he didn't know about in the period in question and he was perhaps not as well informed as once he had been, but as far as he could see there was nothing erroneous in the paper. Very brief note but that's what he said.

I got no reply from Church and the other two people, I don't remember who they are, but my recollection is that one of them said he couldn't see anything wrong and the other said, the other didn't mind.

Gregory Moore, as I gathered later he wrote me didn't know what this is all about at

AF: All the fuss you mean?

WH: Right this letter arrived from me with an explanation of why I was sending it, but how far Moore knew about Tarski I don't know. So he telephoned Henkin and said "What's all this about?" And apparently Henkin said I don't know you'll have to ask Vaught

AF: So Henkin, Vaught signed Henkin's name? Well anyway carry on.

WH: So he rang Vaught and he wrote and told me what Vaught had said. A string of points which some of more force than others and some of more relevance than others, but none of them seemed to me meant that any serious change was needed.

Well at this point this was the point where Doner came on stream and I gave Doner copies of everything. Doner said, well he didn't say anything much at first but then he said that he'd started with the presumption that Vaught was right and that there really hadn't been any development in Tarski's thinking about decidability right through, but as Doner looked at the material and particularly at the 1938-39 book, he felt that that was not a tenable view and he thought that if anything I'd underestimated Well done. Well at this point this was the point where Doner came on stream and I gave Doner copies of everything. Doner said, well he didn't say anything much at first but then he said that he'd started with the presumption that Vaught was right and that there really hadn't been any development in Tarski's thinking about decidability right through, but as Doner looked at the material and particularly at the 1938 to 9 book, he felt that that was not a tenable view and he thought that if anything I'd underestimated.

AF: 0:03:07-0:03:10 Good thank you. Are you going to come tonight?

[UNKNOWN INTERLOCUTOR]: Not sure

AF: Well I do hope I see you again.

WH: 0:03:12-0:04:21 He felt that if anything I had underestimated the change in Tarski's views over that period.

So with my consent Doner included fairly large chunks of the 1938 to 9 book which was never published. I don't know if you know the history of this.

This was work that Tarski did in nineteen twenty nine to thirty and wrote up very, very incompletely in an article, a fairly philosophical, methodological article about the nature of definition as hardly more than a footnote and intending to write it up in full later and he wrote it as a book which got as far as page proofs before the war and then the war broke out so it could never be published and as far as anybody knows the page proofs we just lost the original the type was bombed or something.

AF: 0:04:22-0:04:25 What did you write it in? What language it in?

WH: 0:04:26-0:04:28 I think it was in French. Could be French. It was a language I could read anyway.

AF: 0:04:30-0:04:31 Could you-?

WH: 0:04:31-0:11:19 Tarski did have at least one copy of the proofs [I was gonna say–] and somebody told me may have been Doner that some kind of limited edition was produced very small number of these never properly published.

AF: In Warsaw?

WH: No Berkeley. It was mostly superseded by the Rand Corporation volume.

So Doner filled in those holes very thoroughly and we tied together the threads to cover the places where Van den Dries had been invited and put in a cross reference and that's the paper that appeared. And I've had the date for a journal of symbolic logic 1987 or 1988 I forget I've had well I had forgotten

SF: But that was part of the two volume two issue since–

WH: That's what I suspect must be the paper you have in mind that's got my name on it and is about

SF: But was it the very first introduction to the series of articles or was it a separate–

WH: No, it was

SF: You had some brief statement by way of introduction?

WH: Oh yes

SF: Then there was a separate–

WH: Then there was a separate article actually quite a long one with Doner.

SF: Now sorry you also in this connection said there were some problems with Givant?

WH: Back to Vaught and Doner first because that's not finished yet and it's more important.

Doner told me that he preferred not to put it into the article because it was not solid, it was only an impression that he thought that what had happened was roughly this: that Tarski had a fairly clear intuitive notion of what he meant in 1930 in the, I think it's two paragraphs where he mentions that two of his decision procedures are well that two of his quantifier eliminations do provide decision procedures.

He meant that a working mathematician could use these methods in order to solve actual problems. Take a sentence and actually calculate in your office on a piece of paper whether these sentences are true or not.

Then came Church's thesis and Doner thought that Tarski, though I think he never says this anymore, that Tarski accepted that Church's thesis gave the correct definition of "decidable" and Tarski himself stopped working for a while on decidable theories and started using that the identification was recursive in order to prove a lot of nondecidability results.

Then he worked on various other things but towards the end of his life he got Doner to write up with him the work that he'd done with Mustowski on the First Order of the Ordinals and that article appeared in the proceedings of a conference in I think 1978. It's almost a manifesto for the quantifier elimination approach and Doner said that he had a feeling that Tarski by that date regretted having identified "decidable" as recursive.

The point being this that some recursive functions well in order to carry to evaluate the function you for example set up a machine to list all possible proofs in first order predicate calculus and you wait till the appropriate one comes along and there's an abstract theorem that says that it will do, but who knows when?

And Tarski really had no interest in that kind of decisibility at all. He meant something much more concrete. It wasn't clear that any of the, well it was fairly clear that none of the complexity notions available at the time really fitted either what his feeling was.

Now Doner didn't want to say anything in the article I think for two reasons. The first as I mentioned that this was only an impression and wasn't anything that Tarski had ever said on record and second it was rather dangerous ground in view of the Vaught explosion but if you talk to Doner you might well find that he has more to say about this and I think it is an interesting example of something which may be very, very rare in the Tarski corpus, namely something on which Tarski actually changed his mind.

There are lots of places where Tarski said new things as a result of changing circumstances. People around him raised new questions and new ways of doing things came in but it's quite extraordinary how when he tackles the same topic at different periods he says exactly the same things about them.

I often wonder what that tells one about his character.

AF: That he changes his mind so rarely?

WH: Yes. It's partly I think that in his methodological work he I think he drove himself to push everything right back to first principles so that there really wasn't any room for any change of mind. Everything had been pressed back so hard. This wouldn't affect the recursion stuff because he hadn't actually worked on that.

SF: Well what you say doesn't quite jive with Tarski being happy with Rabin's work on the essential complexity of-

WH: No, it doesn't.

AF: 0:11:19-0:11:30 Maybe I was wrong about that

SF: So we have to listen to that anyway-

AF: Well you mustn't trust me you mustn't trust me on that at all.

WH: 0:11:30-0:11:43 I think Doner told me that his impression was that Tarski had been a bit upset when he first heard this but of course Doner may have been reading something from that wording in their joint article.

AF: 0:11:46-0:11:58 I'll look at that interview. I think the interview is transcribed, really easily to look at it any time.

SF: Are you in the middle of a train of thoughts?

WH: 0:11:59-0:14:39 No, let's finish that one.

AF: No except what you say "I wonder what this says about his character" because...

So take a second to describe your encounters with him personally at this point. Since, me, I love personal impressions-

WH: I met him twice. Once was at the Hannover Symposium. The Hannover European Logic Colloquium in 1966. I don't think I heard a talk by him but I did exchange perhaps three words with him during the very long address by H. Arnold Schmidt which I mentioned yesterday.

The Oberbergmeister welcomed us quite briefly and nicely and Schmidt stood up and talked for a very long time in reply in German I couldn't understand anyone and Tarski was obviously getting bored and he was starting to jump around behind the exhibition cases. And at one point he jumped in my direction and I think we said a few words.

AF: Okay.

WH: The only other time I met him was when he was invited down to UCLA in early 1968 to the Logic afternoon seminars and he talked on equational definability. And he had an equation a single equation in an appropriate language for defining class and groups. And we had several blackboards laid out along the one end of the room and Tarski looked at the line of blackboards and cleared them all right the way down and said "I know where I shall begin but I do not know where I shall finish" and started writing slowly and deliberately this equation. It was very, very long!

AF: How many black boards were...?

WH: How many pieces of wood? I don't remember exactly, but right across the end of the room.Really yeah okay it was the longest formula I've ever seen, the longest equation.

AF: But he didn't run out of blackboard?

WH: No no no he didn't measured it out with his eye. I don't remember the rest of his talk.

AF: 0:14:39-0:14:42 Yeah, but what about any other personal encounters?

WH: 0:14:42-0:15:46 Yes we had the party that evening.

Where was the party Well the party was at CC Chang's house.

AF: Oh yeah? And CC was into swim at that part.

WH: Oh yes and Tarski sat in, I think he sat in one corner pretty well the whole evening and people went across and chatted to him and then left him. And at one point I moved across and they were discussing various things about numbers and they were making two attempts to get into the conversation both of which were unsuccessful so I moved away.

AF: 0:15:47-0:15:51 That's kind of surprising that view of him sitting still. He usually was somebody-

WH: 0:15:51-0:17:28 Well I wouldn't say he was still.

AF: No but he was in a chair. [Yes] He was sitting. He was usually standing and smoking and moving sort of pacing even in a house kind of. But he was fixed in a chair as you remember.

WH: But I don't remember for example whether he may have left early or not I don't remember a number of years ago.

AF: So that's it that's your-

WH: That's my entire personal encounters.

AF: Okay and what about the dope? That's a secondhand story.

WH: Well no it's entirely, I asked the person in question whether I could reveal his name and I encouraged him to get in touch with you if you had any. And I said I could also pass on any information and I've not had a reply and so it

AF: Was it Partee?

WH: I had to leave it there.

AF: I've got lots of other dope stories about him it doesn't matter. I mean he was a big experimenter with all kinds of things.

WH: There was one American logician who surprised a friend of mine during a conversation by passing around the room a tin with various coloured pills in it. And he said "I don't know what these are, some of them are uppers and some of them are downers and some of them I don't know" That wasn't Tarski?

AF: 0:17:28-0:18:09 That wasn't Tarski. No, he wouldn't do that.

No he would take things though that would specifically create some kind of effect. He was a very definitely a sensualist and went out but that might have been earlier than.

So now you were going to ask a question.

SF: Have you heard the story of Presburger and the thesis that he didn't, that the PhD that he didn't get from Tarski?

WH: 0:18:10-0:20:04 I've heard a story namely that Presburger was proposing to offer for a PhD material which wasn't really much more than the material that he'd already offered for the Master's degree that Presburger's article is based on. And Tarski said this is not good enough and if those are the facts then it's quite clearly not good enough.

And I have Presburger's article I got somebody from Poland to send it to me. It's clear that Presburger was pretty much instructed by Tarski what to do.

Presburger was proving the completeness of a set of axioms that Tarski had written down for him by a method which Tarski had already laid out in detail.

Now that's absolutely fine for a master's degree, just the sort of thing one does give. But for, I would look at that and say no that's not a PhD.

SF: But that was his decision procedure for addition? [Yes] For integer addition? [Yes] Which subsequently came to be considered one of the prime examples of elimination of qualifiers.

WH: That's right, really it always was one of the prime examples but then Tarski had it all.

It was a mechanical business to write to and it's not all that long. So it flows out quite smoothly. Now it was certainly a much more exciting master's thesis than most people could hope to write. But then to offer that again as a PhD I think is not on.

AF: 0:20:04-0:20:08 What if he had offered it as a PhD thesis in the first place and not as master's thesis?

WH: 0:20:12-0:21:01 Well there's much less original in it to my eye than in Wanda Szmielew, and she had to do some real work sorting out the appropriate exact sequences.

I don't know it doesn't look to me like a PhD thesis.

SF: Well what's the evidence that Tarski set this all up for Presburger?

WH: Oh the text of the article! "Here is a set a set of axioms which has been proposed by Professor Tarski we shall prove by the following method which is exactly the method that Tarski has been teaching to all his students for the last four years that this is indeed a complete set."

AF: 0:21:02-0:21:10 What about the set of basic formulas. Do you think Tarski gave those too?

WH: 0:21:11-0:22:25 Oh no, well I think yes...

SF: But you don't have evidence.

WH: Well not here no. I'd have to look back at it and see.

AF: Well everybody seems to think the Presburger was screwed somehow so that's why Sol's bringing that up.

WH: You say everybody but I don't know the facts on this, I heard that Presburger was denied a degree for this and I mentioned this to I think somebody from Poland and said "is that really true that after that work Presburger didn't get his degree?" And my informant said "no you got it wrong he got the master's degree that that was presented for but he didn't get a PhD that he wanted to use essentially the same material for."

Now that's just something that somebody said to me so if that's the fact of it then from what I could see in the paper, Presburger was not screwed. But do you have more facts?

SF: 0:22:25-0:23:55 No, I don't, no, it's just it has come up several times, several people...

AF: It just keeps coming up. The Lindenberger thing. The priority business always comes up about how often Tarski's always grabbing priority. And the Presburger thing comes up, then the fact that Pressburger was killed during the war and all that somehow there is the impression is left that there was somehow bad behavior on Tarski's part.

WH: Well if somebody is doing a PhD under you and they're a decent mathematician they ought to get a degree at the end. Something has gone wrong somewhere if they don't. But what I don't know is I mean I don't know whether Presburger just didn't do the stuff that was expected of him. That can happen. Or whether he was badly advised on what to do and then Tarski wouldn't be at fault I've got absolutely no evidence on that and I don't think one should make judgments without...

AF: Except for the general picture of Tarski being such a difficult taskmaster. So then this picture gets built built up and generalized. [Yes] But so it's nice to have a different at least somebody who's putting in a different light as you are perhaps.

WH: 0:23:56-0:27:42 Well just asking for evidence I think, yeah. About the priorities, that stinks, it really does. That thing that Adian produced about the "law of female logic."

AF: I don't know that. What is that?

WH: I sent it to you.

AF: Oh I didn't look at it.

WH: No by email. You did, you commented.

AF: I did? Okay. Well, tell me again.

WH: When Adian telephoned Tarski, Adian was visiting the states. And quite early in the conversation Adian mentioned "Kolgomorov's law of female logic" namely that if the conclusion is pleasant then the law is, then the implication is valid.

AF: I don't think that I got it. I would not have forgotten. I mean I forget a lot but I don't think that forgotten.

WH: Well yes. Artyomov- When you first told me that you were collecting stuff, I mentioned this to Artyomov who was staying with me at the time he said "well here's one from Adian." Okay so here it goes.

I think this was in nineteen... it was the year that Adian visited the States and got booed in lots of places because-

AF: He's anti-Semitic.

WH: I don't know if he's anti-Semitic, it's slightly funny.

AF: That's why he got booed.

WH: But he was booed for having not stood up for a Jew who did get screwed.

AF: Yeah that makes you anti-Semitic.

WH: Life is sometimes a bit more complicated than that, and Adian is now generally reckoned to be one of the liberal gang. Though he's a most unpleasant character. [So anyway] At that stage he didn't defend a person that clearly he should have defended that he was. I don't remember but I can find out, they say it's well recorded.

SF: Not [Enoch Zilber???]?

No no no this was somebody, there was a book that he wrote called "It seems I am a Jew."

SF: Kushnik?

WH: I don't remember.

AF: Okay so let's not get distracted.

WH: So Adian was persona non grata in all sorts of places. So Yershoff had been booed down.

AF: Double, triple persona non grata.

WH: So for that reason Adian, I think didn't want, if I remember right, Adian didn't want to travel to Berkeley for fear of the same thing.

So he telephoned Tarski instead and quite early in the conversation Adian mentioned Kolgomorov's law of female logic which is something to the general effect that "if the conclusion is pleasant then it's true."

And Adian says that at this point he heard an explosion down the other end of the line and when he could make out what Tarski was saying Tarski would say was saying "That is not Kolgomorov's law of female logic, that is Tarski's law of female logic!" I proposed it in 1932! Adian challenged this, producing evidence, and there was a long and unpleasant conversation with who had really invented this thing. This left no time for genuine maths.

AF: 0:27:42-0:28:02 Yeah I don't think I got this if I did.

SF: I remember it now.

SF: We did get it? Yeah. Then I've got it but boy, then there are big holes in the cheese up there. Well, priority priority.

WH: 0:28:02-0:28:11 I wouldn't quite put it past Adian to make this up a little bit. [Yeah] Adian is I think a very shrewd character and he knows where to stir things a bit.

AF: 0:28:11-0:28:23 What's his name? Who told me Leszek Pacholski told me not to trust Wolenski. So I'm getting all advice about who not to trust.

WH: 0:28:23-0:28:37 What's this about Wolenski? Wolenski was one of the people who wrote to me after my Aristotelian Society paper and he gave me factual information. 

AF: He told me not to trust his "factual information." Because...

WH: [UNINTELLIGIBLE]

AF: 0:28:37-0:28:55 Yeah, no just that it has to be checked because he accounted he said that he came across stuff that he, Pacholski had told to Wolenski that Wolenski reported inaccurately so he just felt he was not necessarily malicious but careless.

WH: 0:28:56-0:29:55 The most inaccurate reporter by the way is Frankiewicz.

AF: Is who?

WH: Frankiewicz, Frankiewicz. By the way, if this is relevant... Frankiewicz

AF: Spell Frankiewicz

I don't think I can FRANKIEWICZ. Some people call him "Frankenstein" [OK]. He's a set theorist, well topologist and he always brings nuggets of misinformation with him when he travels westwards and in 1976 he brought with him the information that Kuratowski had just told him that Tarski had died.

No ambiguity. Absolutely definitely had it from Kuratowski, Tarski had just died.

AF: That's amazing.

WH: So I remember writing to Givant and saying Is this true? And Givant wrote back and said "no Tarski is still very much alive."

AF: 0:29:55-0:30:29 Yeah, that's amazing.

The other thing by the way that Pukolski told me that I didn't tell you is that Roche, and there's very bad blood between Roche and Tarski and that's why he never would answer my letter, I sent him a longe letter with a million questions and there was no answer and so there's an explanation for that.

Okay now what were you going to say about Givant and then we'll quit and go look at the town?

WH: 0:30:30-0:43:04 Yeah I'm not quite sure what went wrong there but I was talking to Givant on the telephone about this joint, no about, this framework article that I put together. And he told me about similar things that he'd been planning to write and I said I thought that sounded really good and went ahead with it. And I then sent round the next version of the framework, the one that Vaught so strongly objected to, and I also had a strong objection from Givant on the amazing grounds that some of the things that were in there were his contribution and not mine.

AF: Givant's contribution?

WH: Yes there were things which everybody who knows anything about Tarski knows are laid out quite explicitly and clearly in papers of his in the nineteen thirties.

AF: In Tarski's papers?

WH: Yes. So I said this to Givant and Givant said he wasn't supposing that I'd stolen the information from him, I'd simply stolen from him the idea that these should be mentioned in an article about Tarski!

Now this, two comments on this. The first is that I think I may have been at fault on something a bit earlier that Doner once phoned me and said that he, I telephoned Doner quite often and asked him how was his thing coming along and he would always spin me some yarn.

SF: Was this from England do you recall?

WH: Yes.

SF: Before email days?

WH: Yeah that's right. Now he did send me a Mac disc once that was useful with a selfdestruct on it set for a date one month in the future.

One of the yarns he'd spun me was that he'd just had a conversation with Givant about things that might go into this paper into his article for the JSR. It occurred to me afterwards he might have been suggesting to me that Givant should be brought in as a coauthor.

Now he certainly didn't say anything like that explicitly but one or two remarks of Givant did rather strongly suggest that Givant was under the impression that he was also invited to, that he was invited to write the paper the Doner and that I'd somehow stolen his share of this.

I have no idea how such a confusion could have happened but I do suspect that it did happen and that this was the source of his animus.

Now in fact I was running the whole show and nobody did anything except at my invitation and I never issued any kind of invitation to Givant to join in this chapter. I did invite him to do the bibliography which he did absolutely superbly. Very conscientious job. That's the first comment and the second is that this was not the first time that I'd come across Givant making noises of this kind.

I think Givant wrote his thesis under Vaught but the problem I think was proposed by Tarski. The problem was to characterize those varieties which are uncountably categorical. There was a student in Russia called Palutin, Yevgeny Palutin working on exactly the same problem at the same time and there was a bit of to and fro. The Russian working with his friends would there was a gang of them over there with an interest in this but Palutin was the main one.

They would make an advance Palutin and Givant and his friends would make an advance and a note would go into the MS abstract notices or whatever it was and quite a bit of to and fro.

And at one stage Tarski said to Givant, "It looks to me as if the kind of structure that you're finding in these objects you're looking at is the type of structure analyzed in a paper of Urbanik in Fundamental Mathematics. And Urbanik shows that any such structure is essentially a vector space over a division ring. Why don't you try and see if you can use that?"

And this was the crucial breakthrough. This was the part where Givant was able to pin down exactly what structures were involved. By the way, it was the universal algebra equivalent of Zilber's breakthrough in general model theory. And as Zilber later showed his approach would have done essentially the same job as Urbanik's paper but Urbanik did the necessary job and Givant published an abstract mentioning this fact and attributing the suggestion to Tarski.

The next abstract from Palutin used the paper of Urbanik for a similar purpose but contained no acknowledgment [Uh-oh!]. It was now published material and neither Tarski nor Givant had written the paper by Urbanik. It's true that Tarski had suggested it but it was a fairly well known paper and Palutin had certainly done the necessary preliminary work to slot it in and Givant then wrote a letter to Palutin accusing him of having misused material from this abstract and felt, as I gather, felt he got no adequate reply to this. So when he published his full results there was a remark which read very much as if it was intended to accuse Palutin by name of plagiarism without actually saying anything that anybody could take him to court for.

And having read this sentence when I was talking to Givant in the early days of this of the Tarski project I asked him had I correctly interpreted the sentence and he said yes. It was several years before the barriers came down before I could get to Palutin's response. All Palutin would say was that yes, he had had a letter from Givant accusing him of plagiarism or of improperly using this material and it was very upsetting.

Whether this was before or after it was about the same time as Palutin broke his back in a swimming accident I don't know but the broken back could easily explain why no sensible reply reached Givant.

And to this day Palutin walks with a bad limp. Nobody thought he would survive!

But there is I can say more about I did mention to you that I thought there might be problems with Givant. In the 1970's I guess it must have been I think Tarski used Givant as a kind of secretary to send messages to people who had not made correct attributions. And you'll find at least one of these in print. I have had the following letter from Professor Givant who informs me that Professor Tarski is told in the following...

AF: Do you have that letter?

WH: This is not a letter this is a published paper this is and it's in the proceedings of a conference. It was a Polish author and Tarski was complaining that inadequate credit had been given chiefly to Fraïssé and Tarski was absolutely right about this.

No doubt whatever that Tarski was right on the point of history and also I think Tarski was right in pressing the point because Fraïssé was very badly misused. And part of the problem was that everybody who knew Fraïssé could see that there was no way that he could, I mean just talking to him I could see that he was very slow witted! Everybody supposed that the man must be some kind of hanger on but in fact if one waded through his almost impenetrable great jungle of articles that he published in Algeria there was gold in them and Tarski knew that.

But, this is only an impression, I have an impression that Tarski was not a good influence on Givant that Givant didn't ever have Tarski's I mean, not that Tarski himself was all that good at it, but Givant certainly was not, at distinguishing essential new ideas from just a new way of phrasing things. And Givant's published paper in which he makes these remarks about Palutin also has very long sections interleave between the mathematics claiming credit for "small pieces of notation" and all sorts of things. And I think it must be Tarski's fault.

By the way there's another example you might look at on this and Sol will tell me if I'm being an idiot on this. There's a thing known as the Chang-Mackay theorem.

AF: Chang-Mackay?

WH: Yes. which was actually discovered independently by Vaught and what's more Vaught proved more than the others, he showed that it didn't need the continuum hypothesis. All of this was reviewed by Keisler in the maths reviews at a point where Keisler was I think still a student. He was a student of Tarski wasn't he?

SF: Yes

WH: And he was writing stuff about large cardinals for Tarski at this point. And there's quite a long discussion as I recall it of the exact date in the month on which Vaught and Mackay respectively made their discoveries. And to me it's indecent if two people independently make a discovery nobody has any business working out whether it was the tenth of July that one of them did in the twentieth of July that another did.

AF: 0:43:05-0:43:11 It's a horse race!

WH: 0:43:11-0:43:21 Yes now it's interesting that Keisler does it. It strikes me as very out of character for Keisler. In his later work there's absolutely nothing of this. So I'm just wondering if this is...

AF: 0:43:22-0:44:01 If this is Tarski.

SF: Oh there's no question that Tarski would insist on those kinds of...

WH: If you want an example you can trace it easily in those reviews.

AF: Yeah that's very nice, I mean there are going to be two million examples of that, I'm sure, but I think this is a very neat neat example so it's good to have that thing. So it's in the math reviews, you have well it would be when before Keisler got his PhD so that would be easy to

SF: 1960's? So it's a review of Chang Mackay?

WH: 0:44:02-0:44:05 Yes. I don't think Vaught published it.

AF: 0:44:09-0:44:41 Okay

SF: There were two things maybe.

AF: I want to have some time for town but go on.

SF: There were often cases where Russians found things independently or were said to have found things independently of Americans. I think one was the Ax-Kochen-Ershov result. And there was often a suspicion on the Western side that the Russians knew of this work somehow.

AF: They were reading it.

WH: 0:44:42-0:45:16 I was involved in one of these myself. So it wasn't just Americans, it was the West generally. [Yes] I sent a student of maine a problem to I think it was a problem proposed by MacIntyre. And the problem I can't remember, there was a question session at a conference in either 1969 or 1971 and MacIntyre and I walked around the town and compiled a list of questions and I don't remember exactly who put in what?

AF: 0:45:16-0:45:21 Which town? That's just your town.

WH: 0:45:21-0:46:51 Well I think it was Cambridge which makes it the Cambridge Conference but I don't remember whether that was 1969 or 1971. Probably 1971 Cambridge yes and I spoke and delivered the list of problems and one of them was whether there could be an uncountably categorical countable theory, complete countable theory, which is not model complete but can be made model complete by adding finitely many symbols. And I then gave that problem to a student of mine called Mike Mortimer who solved it.

Mortimer's thesis went to various places and very soon afterwards into the hands of Dan Saracino who realized that the same construction could be iterated so as to produce, I'm going to get this wrong, but roughly an uncountably categorical theory with no finite forcing companion.

No finite generic model, no finite generic model.

This was happening in the period 1974 to 1976 or 1977.



--- END TRANSCRIPTION ---