It's mostly protected by dunes and this particular point's a little, about 10 kilometres north of the place where I grew up. There is a big gap and so until the late Middle Ages it was actually a total(15:56,???) area. It was sort of pretty much a mess of inlets from the sea and then and and and lakes and marshes and so forth and they started reclaim already quite early on but that meant building a dike to close that gap and that was one of the main defenses against the sea. So that was the main project or the main task of this corporation and there were also other dikes that were providing second protection and roads on them. So that's the job he got and that's why we moved to the place where I grew up. (I see. I see.) So we moved already in 1942 but then during the later parts of the war we were moved to another... so this is the village where I grew up grew up, between the town where this office was of my father and the sea basically. We were moved away from there, evacuated during, I can't remember, I think 1943 to 45, because it was all part of the German defence line. So we went to a place on the other side of the town. My earliest memories are of that place. And then in the summer of 45 we moved back to this village called Bergen. So that's actually where I grew up. I was four.

IC: 0:16:44-0:16:45
 And you went to school there?

HK: 0:16:45-0:16:59
 I went to school, yeah, in that village. There was an anthroposophic Steiner school that had just been set up. I was the sixth student of that school.

IC: 0:16:59-0:17:02
 They just opened it?

HK: 0:17:02-0:17:22
 Well, the year before, or half a year before. Anyway, so it was very small to start with, but it's now actually very well established. Not only is it a primary school, but also a sort of, what do you call it?

IC: 0:17:22-0:17:24
 Middle or high school. Middle or high school.

HK: 0:17:24-0:17:24
 Yeah, there's no middle, in Holland, it's just high school.  It seems to be quite flourishing.

 But, yeah, so I went there and then that was only a primary school and then went to a sort of classical gymnasium in this nearby town where my father also had his office. And so then at the end of that I quit university and I wanted to become a theoretical physicist. So I went to...

IC: 0:17:59-0:18:04
 Okay, so before going to university you already had this interest and this desire.

HK: 0:18:04-0:19:26
 Yeah, so I for a long time didn't quite know what I was doing. Actually I did sort of, there was a scientific branch and also a humanist branch and that made it possible for me to get an Abitur in both of these. But then by the time that I was going to leave high school it was already clear to me that I wanted to do physics. And so I went to the university where my father had also been, it was Leidon, not eichoice. And I did sort of the preparatory work, did a bachelor's degree in mathematics, or physics and mathematics. And while I was there, I met somebody who was also, they did mathematics and physics, and this is not much of a difference. He was one year ahead of me as a man by the name of Dick de Jongh. I don't know if you've come across him. He was really a mathematical magician. He became that and did a PhD under Kleene in Wisconsin, in Madison. Then came back to Amsterdam and eventually got a professorship for the last few years. And he's still around. And I, a couple of years I took.

IC: 0:19:26-0:19:33
 Oh, that de Jongh then! Ah, okay, okay, I see his name. And as I said, I know him as a logician, a mathematical... that's cool.

HK: 0:19:33-0:20:51
 So we became already very good friends in Leiden, and he knew about this Institute of Bethz. In fact, his father who was, I think he was a doctor and I think was for a while also Beth's general physician. So his father and Beth knew each other quite well and Dick knew about this whole thing via his father and had already, much earlier than I, decided that's where he wanted to continue. And he told me about it and I thought I'd seen these people in Leiden disappear in the Institute of Theoretical Physics and never came out. So I thought, okay, maybe I should give myself a chance to do something else before I devote myself completely to this thing. And so I went along with him, so we went together in 1961, it was, from Leiden to Amsterdam and we did pretty much everything together. We followed the same courses.

IC: 0:20:51-0:21:02
 So you formally transferred then? So in other words, you went from the University of Leiden to the University of Amsterdam as a transfer student? (No, I wasn't going there.) Oh, so not so formal. You could go there and take it.

HK: 0:21:02-0:21:10
 So this degree that I got in Leiden is something that is actually complete in itself.

IC: 0:21:10-0:21:20
 And then you can transfer it to other institutions. You can take it anywhere you like. Okay, I see. Was the degree that you got in Leiden a prerequisite for you to join the institute in Amsterdam?

HK: 0:21:20-0:21:54
 No, I don't think so. I didn't think it ever came up. I mean, I couldn't have become a graduate student without having such a… (I see. I see.) Okay. …coddy dance. (I see. I see.) It was the title that you needed. The actual subject matter or not, I'm not sure. I mean, having had mathematics with me was helpful, but it was strictly speaking an institute as part of the philosophy faculty, so I can't imagine that they could have imposed such a requirement even if it was very sensible.

IC: 0:21:54-0:22:11
 So, do you remember the impression that you had of, like, I guess the environment was, the kind of experience that you were having was significantly different from the one in Leiden. (Yeah.) Because now you join a group where there is a leading figure that, you know, has a certain kind of interest.

HK: 0:22:11-0:22:51
 I mean, education at European universities, I don't know what you experienced when you were much younger, but in those days it was actually very badly organized and so there were massive courses, and it was all very anonymous, and you got occasionally a little bit of a contact with the assistants of the professors who did the exercise sessions, but that was about it and then you saw the professor only when you went for it doing this sort of oral exam. Yep, yep. Familiar? (Oh yeah, very familiar.) I mean, everything was really terrible.

IC: 0:22:51-0:23:04
 And office hours, like, you know, the famous... I mean, you would stop by and see if by any chance the professor was in the office and was willing to talk to you. But there was no, like, regular office hours.

HK: 0:23:04-0:23:38
 I actually never went into any of those. We sort of understood what the stuff was that you had to know and I did go to the lectures, so I had a pretty good idea in most cases of what the subject was about.
 
IC:
 How large was that group?

HK:
 In Leiden?

IC: 
 No, in Amsterdam.
 

 Oh, that was totally different. I mean, the Institute, it was a bit like my primary school. When Dick and I were pretty much the only students, I think we were the only students in that year.

IC: 0:23:38-0:23:54
 Okay, so sorry, the interaction that you are talking about was the interaction that you had in Leiden where there was interaction. (Yeah, yeah, yeah.) I was about to say, I thought there was a more personal interaction in the institute. Okay, okay, now I remember. I was a little bit surprised, like really? I thought there was kind of... You had a personal interaction with Beth, and that's what I thought.

HK: 0:23:54-0:25:21
 Totally different. And so, yeah, these lectures... So, to be a graduate student, like it's still in the US, you have to do a certain number of coursework and actually there too you have to pass exams over the material covered in those courses. And basically that was all that was required. So the degree that you ended up with was something called Doctoral and it corresponds, it was more stuff, but it corresponds more to a Masters than to a PhD. You did have to write a thesis, but my thesis was just sort of reconstructing all the probes in a famous paper by Tarski called The Theory of Reductive Systems. So, I mean, I learned a lot from it and it was not true, of course the paper has no proof anyways..., but still, it took some thinking to see how these procedures go. But that was basically it. And I think I may have made some general comments on what the point of this might be, but there's very little of that. So it's not really a PhD, so the PhD came later.

IC: 0:25:21-0:25:27
 So what kind of courses do you take?

HK: 0:25:27-0:26:00
 Well, the subject itself was called philosophy but it was really in this institute of mathematical logic and foundations of science that involved a course on scientific methodology. I think we did this book by Nagel. And then there was one course on, basically, I mean, I knew no logic at that point.

IC: 0:26:00-0:26:04
 So it was sort of- Yeah, yeah, yeah. There was no introduction to logic, yeah. 

HK: 0:26:04-0:26:13
 Propositional (unintelligible) logic. And we did that by this book called, entitled Four Methods by Beth, which is basically his, I had written about it before, but it is at the same time a textbook, and his first really smooth presentation of the semantic tableau. (Wow!) And that I'm still very, very grateful that I was trained in one click that way because semantic tableaus has this extraordinary quality that it is on the one hand (Yeah!) a method of proof and at the same time it sort of, yeah time it's based on the idea that when you want to prove something you want to try and construct a counter example and if the system is such that your construction method doesn't succeed then that means that the conclusion does fall from the premises. (Nice.) In the other case, if it doesn't, then you will in the end get a counter-model. So that marriage of semantics and proof theory, I think, makes it actually very special if you look at all these other kinds of systems we have for first-order logic.
 
 And so that was, then there was a course, I'm trying to think, there was a course by Bett that I, sort of history of logic, that I said in what I the two things that I mentioned so far were actually things that I had to pass an exam and I also had to do one course with a man he would be quite famous among the name of Alderwelt, meaning literally 'old world', it just fitted completely. So he was a more traditional philosopher and I did an exam with him on Bergson, Materia Memoria, and a book by his philosopher Zimmer, the German philosopher from the beginning of the 20th century which I didn't like at all. I didn't like Marteria Memoria very much also. I got a very good mark for this exam. Never was anything so unjustified.
 
 And what else? What other courses did I have? I can't remember exactly what was part of an exam (unintelligible), but we did a lot of project research. Beth had a project that was financed from Euratom that was at the time this thing of the six of the European community. What was it called at this time? Yeah, you know what I mean. France, Germany, Italy, and the Benelux. Anyway, so they had... So Euratom was this attempt at the time to develop nuclear energy...

IC: 0:29:46-0:29:51
 Wasn't it called... I think they were using, were they using the word community?

HK: 0:29:51-0:30:10
 No, there was something called the European Society of, Community of Coal and Steel. Way back.

IC: 0:30:10-0:30:29
 Oh, okay, so that's the predecessor, because it was a series of arrangements and agreements for exchanges, like more on the economic side, I see.

HK: 0:30:29-0:30:46
 Right, exactly. And so one big concentration, they already saw that, was the question of how to provide the kind of energy by the time the coal would run out. And so nuclear power was a really big issue. And so they had set up, I don't know if you know, have you ever been to Ispra?

IC: 0:30:46-0:30:53
 Yeah, yeah. So that's when they created the centre in Ispra, which is still there.

HK: 0:30:53-0:30:58
 Yeah, I know. I have not been back since those days.

IC: 0:30:58-0:31:05
 So you guys were directly involved in this project then? So not only were you taking courses, but then you became some sort of assistant?

HK: 0:31:05-0:32:56
 Well, so the story this as far as the project is considered. They built this experimental reactor there and they had bought the most powerful computer of the day, an IBM 1790, no it was 37, I can't remember the exact specification but it was the largest and it was very, very, very expensive. And it was already true in those days, perhaps even more than it is now, that every day such a computer doesn't do anything, I mean, the amortization is so enormous, a tremendous waste of time, and they had counted on this reactor becoming critical at a certain time. And there was a power black station here in Stuttgart. So this computer was sitting there doing nothing and so they, the people in charge wondered how they could give it things to do. And one thing, and I don't know exactly how the details of how this deal was made, was that they got in touch with Beth or vice versa so that Bette would provide this computer with tasks in proof theory. Just because otherwise it would have been so unhappy! So there were a number of such projects. This was one of them. I remember this was very shortly after I got (unintelligible) in his first year I got a kind of assistantship paid for from this project.

IC: 0:32:56-0:33:04
 So this was the big advantage for Beth. So for him it made sense to accept this because he would be provided with money that could use as support.

HK: 0:33:04-0:33:42
 I had two collaborators, a Mitarbeiter, whatever you call it, paid for by the university for his job and they did most of the teaching, maybe even three, but they had a lot more people, I think four or five, five. Dick was also paid from this, who all got paid from this project. And it was great because it made it go up. I was really part of something for the first time in my life. And I got on with the people very well. And...

IC: 0:33:42-0:33:48
 Which meant, Hans, that you and Dick, you had to be physically in Ispra?

HK: 0:33:48-0:34:09
 Well, we went there, I think, I don't know if it was more than one time, but we did go there one time to present our stuff and to see what it was like and to see what was coming out of this computer also. One shouldn't forget with these things that that was long before the Internet.

IC: 0:34:09-0:34:23
 Yeah, yeah, sure! Believe me, I know that very well. I grew up without Internet, so I know what you're talking about. (Anyway, so...) And roughly as far as time is concerned, so we are 1960...?

HK: 0:34:23-0:34:36
 So, Dick and I went to Amsterdam in the fall of 61 (Okay, okay.) and this was in the course I think of that first academic year 61, 62 it was somewhere in the spring. Anyway so,

IC: 0:34:36-0:34:46
  in the program was a two-year program? (You couldn't put...) The master?
  
HK:
 The academic?

IC:
 Yeah, the academic...
 
HK:
 There was no (crosstalk)
 

IC: 0:34:49-0:34:53
 Oh, it was open and flexible. Yeah, I see.
 
HK: 0:34:53-0:36:07
 Yeah, yeah, you could take pretty much (unintelligible) in those days. And so, Dick took three and I took four, so he had to (unintelligible) again. And so that was really sort of hazy exactly. Apart from these three exams I just mentioned, the exams they had to do towards this degree, as far as the main part was concerned. But actually the more demanding parts were, he had auxiliary, I think he digged to, auxiliary subjects, mathematics and physics, and had to pass the exams for the main courses they were offering there. So that was actually quite challenging. It was a course on differential equations that even the full-time mathematicians would fail in enormous numbers.

IC: 0:36:07-0:36:18
 Who was teaching that course? So you guys were taking that in the mathematics department? Yes. Ah, okay, okay. It was not offered in the institute. No, no, no. It was part of the curriculum, you had to go to a different, like...

HK: 0:36:18-0:36:37
 I can't remember now. Yeah, I guess I'll see the man in front of them. The name will come to me if I (unintelligible).
 
HK's wife:
 I just want you... 

IC:
 Oh, yeah, this is... Oh, I can take a break. All right
